But Mieko could not stop the sobs shaking her whole body.
“Shh—shh! You must stop crying,” Grandpa whispered. “Your tears will not help those who were
killed by the atom bomb. Their souls must swim across the River of Death to heaven. Every tear you
shed drops into the river and makes it deeper.”
Mieko shuddered, imagining what it would be like to struggle in that icy cold water. Gradually, she
became quiet.
Grandpa straightened the bedclothes.
“Enough of dreary thoughts,” he said. “Try to sleep like my rock in the garden.”
As soon as he was gone Mieko went to the open window. She pushed up her bangs, letting the night
air cool her damp forehead. With no moonlight Mieko could barely see Grandpa’s rock. She was
sorry for it, so awfully alone out there in the swallowing dark. It looked as alone as she felt.
TWO
GRANDMA’SHOME
Every morning Mieko put on the dress that Grandma had sewn out of an old summer cotton kimono. It
had no buttons or belt so that Mieko could easily slip it over her head. Grandma had taken the long-
sleeved blouses and baggy trousers that Mieko had brought and put them into the scrapbag.
“I don’t understand why the government made girls wear those hot, prickly outfits,” she said.
“Thank goodness the war is over and you can put on decent clothes again.”
She sat back on her heels and looked Mieko up and down.
“Much better,” she said with a satisfied smile. “Yes, Mieko, you look like a girl again.”
There was always much to do around the farm. Grandma never seemed to stop working—cooking,
cleaning, sweeping, or mending. Mieko tried to help. She fed the chickens, collected eggs, polished
the wooden porch, lit the fire underneath the deep bathtub in the afternoon, and sprinkled water on the
cracked dry earth of the road to keep the dust down.
Kitchen work was the most difficult because Mieko’s hand was clumsy and it hurt whenever she
tried to hold a knife or spoon. She took a long time slicing eggplants and cucumbers with her left
hand.
Once Mieko dropped a whole dish of chopped fish onto the floor. She stood there looking down at
the mess, biting her lip.
“I’m not good for anything!” she cried.
Grandma scooped up the fish, talking all the while.
“Never mind, Mieko. It’s just a little thing. When the doctor came last week he said that your hand
will soon be as good as new. Then you will have no more accidents. ”
Mieko was silent. She knew it would never be as good as new.
As the summer days dragged on, Mieko worried more and more about school. Her grandparents
had not mentioned it, and she hoped that they had forgotten.
But one muggy September morning when they were eating rice and miso soup, Grandma calmly
said, “Mieko, you will be going to school next week. ”
Mieko almost dropped the porcelain spoon that she was trying to carry to her mouth. She was not
hungry any more.
For several moments there were only the sounds of a farm morning—hens clucking and birds
scolding in the garden.
Grandma and Grandpa exchanged worried glances.
“You must go to school,” Grandpa said. “It is important to keep up with your studies.”
Mieko knew all that. But a strange school? With children she did not know? And with a hideous,
twisted hand?
“Maybe they won’t like me, ” she said in a low voice.
“Not like you!” Grandma’s bright eyes sent off sparks. “Why would the others not like you? You
are a nice girl with good manners and new clothes. ” And she brought out a school uniform, neatly
sewn and pressed.
“Here!” She handed it to Mieko. “I made it for a surprise. Go try it on.”
Mieko did not like that kind of surprise. Trembling, she slowly pulled on the navy skirt and white
blouse that smelled of camphor.
“I saved these pieces of cloth all through the war, ” Grandma said, giving the skirt a tug to
straighten it. She beamed. “A perfect fit.”
Mieko lowered her eyes. “Thank you, Grandma,” she murmured.
The first day of school arrived. That morning, Mieko came into the kitchen, looking a little pale.
“I think I’m getting some kind of germ,” she said, coughing. “My throat is sore. I think I’m coming
down with mumps.”
“Open your mouth and say ahhhh, ” Grandma said in, her no-nonsense voice.
She held Mieko’s tongue down with a spoon and peered inside. Then she felt Mieko’s neck.
“Your throat is fine, and your glands are not even the tiniest bit swollen.”
“Do I have to go today?” Mieko pleaded. “Do I, Grandma?”
Grandma paid no attention. She continued stuffing rice into beancurd envelopes that looked like fat
sails. Then she packed them neatly into a lunchbox.
“Such heat!” she said, dabbing at her neck with the edge of her apron. “Mieko, don’t walk too fast
this morning. ”
“I don’t even know where the school is, ” Mieko said. “And ... and I might get lost.”
“I will take you there on my way to the field, ” Grandpa interrupted. “Now scoot upstairs and get
ready.”
“Don’t forget your art supplies, ” Grandma called, putting a piece of dried fish into the lunchbox
for a treat.
Mieko thought it was silly to bring the four treasures when she was not going to use them. But to
please Grandma, she stuck them into her black leather schoolbag.
She took such a long time getting ready that Grandpa finally stomped upstairs. Mieko was combing
her hair and fussing with her uniform.
“Come on!” he said firmly. “You don’t want to be late on your first day.”
“It is the first day that is so scary,” Mieko wailed. “I will sit in the wrong seat ... say the wrong
things ... and everyone will stare at my hand.”
Mieko thought that the new puckered red skin looked even worse than the scabs that were coming
off.
But there was no escape. She trudged alongside Grandpa to school, clutching his work-roughened
hand all the way. When they got there, she hung back.
“Go on in,” Grandpa said, giving her a gentle push. “You will be all right. ”
Mieko watched him stride away until he turned the corner. For an instant she stood there, paralyzed
with fear. Then she took a long, shaky breath and walked slowly through the doorway.
THREE
SCHOOL
Mieko slipped out of her geta and put them in one of the shoe boxes in the hall. She wiped her moist
hands on her skirt and shifted from one foot to the other, waiting for a teacher to come along and
direct her to the right classroom. She pictured her teacher looking old and mean.
Out of the corner of her eye Mieko saw the students come in, some laughing, some arm-in-arm.
They had lived in the town all their lives and knew each other well. Nobody spoke to Mieko.
It was a pleasant surprise when a pretty young woman introduced herself.
“You must be Mieko,” the teacher said warmly. “Your grandfather told me about you. I am Miss
Suzuki. ”
After bowing politely, Mieko followed Miss Suzuki into the classroom to a desk near the back. She
gave Mieko a stubby pencil, carefully sharpened at both ends, and some pages of an old newspaper.
“Try to write in the white spaces,” Miss Suzuki said. “I hope we will be getting more supplies now
that the war is over. Until then, we must make do.”
