As Mieko looked around at all the unsmiling faces, she knew more than ever what loneliness
meant.
“We have a new pupil,” the teacher announced. “Mieko, please stand up.”
Her knees shaking, Mieko got to her feet as thirty pairs of eyes gazed at her. She blushed and tried
to hide her hand behind her back.
“Let’s make her feel welcome,” Miss Suzuki went on. “She has just come from a town near
Nagasaki, and I expect all of you to help her get acquainted with our school.”
This caused a buzzing in the room. As Mieko sank back into her chair, she heard whispers.
“That’s where the big bomb exploded ... Look at her hand ... It makes me sick. ”
Mieko felt smaller than a fly. Just because no bombs had dropped on this part of Japan was no
reason to be stupid. She wanted to scream “Stupid!” at them all. But she swallowed the word. Mother
had often warned her that a nasty word was like a bird—once it flew out of her mouth it would never
fly back. Mieko pressed her lips together so that the word could not escape.
During the morning, Mieko tried hard to concentrate, but Akira made it impossible. He was a skinny
boy with stiff short hair that stood up like a brush and he wore black-rimmed glasses.
Whenever Miss Suzuki was not looking, Akira turned around and made faces at Mieko. He crossed
his eyes and twisted his mouth into strange shapes. He looked so silly that Mieko almost laughed. But
when he hissed, “Monster-hand!” she glared at him.
Mieko heard her mother saying, “Always see beauty, never see ugliness. ” How could anyone see
beauty in Akira?
It seemed that the morning would never end. Mieko was so, nervous that she stumbled over her
own feet and twice she dropped her book. In history class, she could not remember all the names of
the Japanese emperors. Everyone knew those. She did not even try to write, but kept her hands folded
in her lap.
During arithmetic, there was a sudden loud noise outside, and Mieko ducked underneath the desk.
Almost the moment she did it she felt silly. It was only a truck backfiring, not a bomb exploding. Still,
she was shaking. When Akira and some of the others tittered, Mieko wanted to die on the spot.
At that moment Miss Suzuki was pointing to a giant abacus that stood in front of the room.
“Mieko,” she was saying, “please come up and work out this problem in multiplication. ”
“I ... I didn’t hear the question,” Mieko stammered, her mouth dry.
Miss Suzuki’s voice was disapproving.
“You really must try to pay attention, Mieko.”
Akira went up to the abacus and quickly moved the counters to get the correct answer. On the way
back to his seat he gave Mieko a smug look and stuck out his tongue.
“I hope your tongue falls off!” Mieko muttered under her breath.
By lunchtime Mieko’s stomach was in knots. She couldn’t eat one bite of the rice and fish that
Grandma had prepared for her. She just sat there, staring at her chopsticks. How could she use them
in front of the others? What if she dropped food all over the place? Wouldn’t Akira like that!
As they filed out into the schoolyard, Akira came up behind Mieko and grabbed her schoolbag. He
dug into it and pulled out her painting brush. In a flash, he swaggered out into the yard shouting, “Hey!
Look what I’ve got! Monster-hand’s dirty old atom bomb brush!”
Mieko turned pale and ran after him, trying to grab her brush.
“Give it back!” she screamed. “It’s mine!”
Other boys joined in the game.
“Monster-hand! Monster-hand!” they chanted, tossing the brush from one to the other, always just
out of Mieko’s reach.
She felt like crying, but she gritted her teeth, not wanting to cry in front of them.
Suddenly she heard a girl’s voice.
“Stop that! You’re acting like a bunch of babies.”
That ended the trouble. Akira threw the brush to Mieko. The boys shrugged and walked away.
The girl handed Mieko her bag and said, “Don’t let those dumb boys bother you! They are always
doing something childish.”
Mieko knew the girl was called Yoshi. She was small and dainty with a red bow in her hair. And
she smelled of flowers. Mieko wished that she could be exactly like her—so calm and pretty. Instead,
she was upset and hot and sweaty. She was a freak with an ugly hand that seemed to stick out a mile.
Soon a group of girls had gathered around, staring curiously at Mieko and asking questions.
“Did you get that scar from the bomb? What was it like? Were there lots of dead bodies? What did
they look like?”
Mieko looked from one to another. She felt hot and dizzy and her legs went rubbery. All at once the
ring of faces around her started melting together, and she crumpled to the ground. The girls—suddenly
quiet—backed away.
FOUR
GRANDPA
When Mieko came to, she heard voices. The principal was speaking to Miss Suzuki.
“She just seems to be overexcited, that’s all.”
“What makes it so sad,” Miss Suzuki said, “is that a few children have been teasing her. As if she
hasn’t been through enough.”
Mieko sat up and drank some water. All she wanted now was to get out of there.
“Do you think you can walk home alone?” Miss Suzuki’s voice was concerned. “I can send one of
the students with you.”
“No, thank you!” Mieko said quickly. “I’m fine now.”
She certainly did not want any help from them. And if Grandma knew about the fainting spell, she
would make a fuss and call the doctor.
Mieko.left the school. But instead of going straight home, she slowly walked to the field. Grandpa
was working up to his hips in rice plants that were turning a golden brown. Mieko stood on the path,
kicking up little clouds of dirt until he saw her and came over.
“Phew! ” he exclaimed, tipping back his straw hat and wiping his forehead with a small towel.
“Autumn is late this year. I’ll be glad when it cools off.”
Mieko noticed how much his tanned face was like Father’s—yet different. It was thinner and more
wrinkled, and Grandpa’s hair was gray.
“How was school?” Grandpa asked, tucking the small towel back into his belt.
“Awful!” Mieko mumbled. “I hate everyone there. ”
Grandpa gave her a quick glance that seemed to see right into Mieko’s mind.
“That is a heavy load of hate for a little girl to carry around.” He rubbed the bony knuckles of his
hands to ease the arthritis. “Of course they are all monsters?”
“Yes! ” Mieko replied.
“Have you tried to be friends with anyone?”
Mieko thought of Yoshi. She shrugged and kept her head down so that she wouldn’t have to meet
his eyes.
Grandpa swept an arm toward the rice field.
“See that? Rice does not grow all by itself. I must plant the seeds, fertilize them, and see that no
weeds stop their growth. Then I must separate the seedlings and plant them farther apart. It is not
easy.” His face was serious. “It is not easy to make friends either, especially when you hate almost “
everyone.”
Then he stretched and started back toward the field.
“Think about it!” he called over his shoulder.
Mieko was too upset to think about his words. She wasn’t interested in growing rice, anyway.
At the house a shock was waiting for her. Inside the entrance, neatly placed together on the cement
floor—toes out—were two shiny brown shoes.
Mieko tried to slip past the living room, but Grandma heard her.
