Grandma poured some tea for Mieko into one of her best cups. Mieko noticed the flower design—
the same as on Mother’s dishes.
“Miss Suzuki thinks that you should stay home for a little while until you have your strength back,”
Grandma said.
The teacher nodded.
“When you feel better, Mieko, you may come back to us. You are always welcome. ” She gave
Grandma a sideways glance. “There is plenty of time. ”
Mieko watched them over the rim of her cup.
Grandma frowned, tucking a wisp of gray hair into the bun at the back. “But Mieko must learn to
get along with other children. And there is her painting ...”
Miss Suzuki leaned forward and lowered her voice.
“Please don’t worry. Mieko will be back in school soon and she can easily catch up. Of course,
there is no reason why she cannot continue her painting at home. ”
Mieko’s face lit up. No more school! No more teasing from Akira and the boys. No more giggles
behind her back. Maybe she would never go back to that school. But continue with her painting? How
could she do that? Without the fifth treasure it didn’t matter.
Later that day, the mailman brought a letter from Mother.
Dear Mieko,
There are so many patients that your father and I are working long hours in the clinic. We hope
that you are happy on the farm and getting strong and healthy. By now you must be in school and
making many new friends. Write to us when you can. We miss you.
Love,
Mother
“Any news from home?” Grandma asked.
Mieko shook her head. Then she ran upstairs and put the letter away.
That night she was already in bed when Grandpa came home late. His footsteps sounded heavy and
tired on the stairs.
“Mieko,” he whispered, “are you still awake?”
She squeezed her eyes shut and pretended to be asleep. Mieko didn’t want to hear any more about
growing rice or making friends.
“I understand, ” Grandpa said, as if he knew that she was faking. “When the time is right, you will
go back to school.”
The kindness in his voice made Mieko feel worse. She lay very still, scarcely breathing.
At the door Grandpa said softly, “Believe me, Mieko, some lovely sunny day you will look around
and find a friend. And in your happiness you will paint beautiful word-pictures again. Just like
before.”
Mieko heard the rustle of the door sliding shut.
“He’s wrong,” she thought. “I’ve lost the fifth treasure for good. And I’ll never be happy again.”
FIVE
WAITING
Grandma asked nothing of Mieko now. Long before Mieko woke up she would put on her black cotton
work pants and shirt, cover her head with a straw hat, and be out in the fields to help Grandpa. He
needed help because so many young men had gone to fight in the war and had never come back.
Days were just plain dull, like strips of dried old seaweed. Mieko escaped into her thoughts,
building a wall around herself the way a turtle builds its shell. She was always looking back, thinking
about home.
Sometimes she scolded the hens to keep them from pecking holes in the paper panes of the sliding
doors. Or she watched spiders spin their webs between the rocks underneath the porch. Mieko was
like the snail that lumbered slowly toward the shade. Trapped inside and silent.
She would sit on the springy tatami in the living room for hours, studying the scroll painting in the
alcove. Grandma changed it with the seasons, so this one showed trees in fall colors, and a poem
written with graceful strokes.
I thought I saw the fluttering, leaves arise,
Returning to their branches;
No, it was only butterflies!
Before long, Mieko had memorized the calligraphy and could make a copy of it in her head. She
remembered when her own brushstrokes had been good enough to hang on the wall.
Mieko avoided talking with anyone. The few times when Grandma had afternoon tea with a friend,
Mieko would escape to the nearby beach. Someone had left a length of huge clay sewer pipe there,
and its cool, shadowy interior was her secret hideaway. On the sandy floor she scratched out word-
pictures with a stick—Mother, Father, and Home.
The sunshine was sparkling on the blue ocean, fishermen were hanging and mending their nets, sand
crabs were skittering across the shore, and sea birds were swooping down for their dinner. But
Mieko saw none of it. She couldn’t see anything but her own loneliness.
Another letter arrived from Mother, this time for Grandpa and Grandma. Mieko leaned over
Grandpa’s shoulder as he read parts of it aloud. Mother said they were planning to come to the farm
after the New Year holidays and take Mieko home.
Mieko’s spirits sank. New Year’s Day seemed like years away instead of just a few months.
There was a special note at the end for her:
Mieko dear, is your hand still very painful? By now you must be writing with a pencil. How is the
brush-painting coming along? You heven’t yet told us about school. Write soon.
Love,
Mother.
Mieko did not dare look at Grandpa and Grandma. She was ashamed. How could she write about
school? Or new friends? Or painting? A lump came into her throat and she ran outside. Leaning
against the side of the house, Mieko could hear voices from the living room.
“That girl keeps too much to herself.” Grandma sounded anxious. “It is as though a wicked goblin
has taken over her soul. She hardly smiles, and whenever anyone drops in, Mieko disappears as fast
as a boiled egg slips off chopsticks. And she will not pick up a brush—or even a pencil.”
Grandpa spoke calmly. “When she is ready, Mieko will go back to school. ”
After a long silence, he added, “A young girl in trouble should be left alone. Only Mieko can heal
her inner self. We cannot do that for her.”
“I suppose so,” Grandma said with a deep sigh.
Mieko swallowed hard. She was making her grandparents unhappy, too.
In the morning the doctor arrived. He was surprised at the change in Mieko.
“My goodness, you don’t look at all like the skinny girl who arrived in August. The farm food must
do you good.” He leaned toward Mieko. “But I don’t like that long face. A little happiness would
help you grow up into a pretty young lady.”
Mieko blushed and managed a tiny smile.
“That’s better, ” he said, touching her hand and moving the fingers. “Now, you should be painting
and writing to loosen up those stiff muscles.”
“Is she all right?” asked Grandma, coming in from the kitchen, still carrying the radish she was
chopping up for pickles. “Can she go back to school?”
He nodded and got up to leave.
Mieko’s eyes moved from one to the other. The tightness in her throat almost choked her.
“But I never want to go back!”
“Never is a long, long time,” the doctor said, his eyebrows drawn together in a frown. “You have a
good mind, Mieko, and a talent for calligraphy. They will not develop if you stay home and sulk.”
“Nobody sees my mind.” Mieko’s voice trembled. “They see only my ugly hand. And I am not
sulking. ”
