good mind, Mieko, and a talent for calligraphy. They will not develop if you stay home and sulk.”
“Nobody sees my mind.” Mieko’s voice trembled. “They see only my ugly hand. And I am not
sulking. ”
“I don’t know what to do with her,” Grandma said helplessly.
When the doctor spoke, his voice was stern.
“Mieko, you can be a bitter person all your life, but you are only hurting yourself and your family.
Hatred will grow in your heart like a bad weed until there is no room for love or beauty.”
“I don’t care!” Mieko shouted, running out the door.
Tears stinging her eyes, she ran past the quiet neighborhood farmhouses and climbed up the
mountain. The path wound around oddly shaped rocks and over grassy slopes. Mieko did not stop
until she reached a stream partway up. Hot and tired, she flopped down and dabbled her fingers in the
cool water.
The air was quiet and dry as a rice cracker. Mieko rested her head on the mossy bank, listening to
the slow droning of insects and the trickling of the water over pebbles.
Suddenly, there was a rustling nearby.
It was a queer sound—not very far from her. Mieko remembered the stories she had heard about
the red-faced Tengu, the demon that lived in mountains. It was said that he had wings and claws and a
long, long nose. He carried bad children into his cave and they were never seen, again.
If that were true, Mieko thought, the Tengu would get her for sure. She began to think that perhaps
she had been a little bad lately. Mieko counted the bad things: she worried her grandparents, stayed
home from school, was rude to the doctor, hated almost everyone, and did not even try to paint or
write a letter home. It was quite a lot.
Mieko held her breath and listened.
The spooky sound came again—a sort of whirring of wings.
She scrambled to her feet and scurried down the twisty path as fast as her legs could go.
SIX
YOSHI
As Mieko rushed headlong down the mountain she almost bumped into someone.
It was Yoshi.
In a yellow dress and matching bow in her black hair, Yoshi looked like a butterfly. For a few
seconds Mieko was too stunned to say anything.
“What’s the matter?” Yoshi asked. “Why are you running? You look scared to death.”
When Mieko could get her breath, she pointed toward the mountain. “Up there,” she panted, “near
the stream. A Tengu was chasing me.”
“Are you sure?” Yoshi asked, her eyes full of smiles. “We have no Tengu around here. At least, I
don’t think so.”
Mieko’s cheeks turned pink.
“I ... I honestly did hear something. ”
“Probably some small animal.” Yoshi looked curiously at Mieko. “Why don’t you come to school
anymore?”
“The doctor told Grandma that I needed a rest, ” Mieko said softly.
“We thought that you didn’t like any of us at school. ”
“But I thought ... ” stammered Mieko, “I thought you might not like me.”
An awkward silence fell between them.
Finally, Mieko said, “Well ... I guess I should be getting back home.”
Yoshi nodded and followed Mieko down the mountain. When they came to Mieko’s yard, Grandma
was sliding clothes off the bamboo clothes-line into a basket.
“Hello!” Grandma waved. “Come in and sit down.” She served them a special treat of bean cakes.
Grandma asked Yoshi many questions, but Mieko sat silently sipping her tea.
Between bites of the light-as-air crispy pastry filled with sweet bean-jam, Yoshi told Grandma all
about herself and school.
“My parents were killed when I was a baby,” she said, “so I live with my aunt and uncle.”
Mieko stared at her in surprise. She had imagined that Yoshi was the luckiest girl in the world who
had absolutely everything. She wondered how Yoshi could smile and be nice all the time when she
had lost her family.
She accompanied Yoshi to the gate and watched her walk toward home.
In the days that followed, Mieko lingered outside, hoping to see Yoshi again. But she didn’t see her
until a week later. Mieko and Grandma were buying tea in the grocery shop when Yoshi came in.
“Aunt Hisako sent me for some tea,” she told Mieko .
“We came for the same thing,” Mieko said, smiling.
They walked together back to Grandma’s house.
“Would you like to see my room?” Mieko asked shyly.
“Well ... sure. I guess.”
Upstairs, Mieko wanted to show Yoshi something, but she had no special clothes or pretty dolls.
She hesitated, then opened a drawer and brought out her four treasures: the inkstone, inkstick, brush
and roll of rice paper.
Yoshi ran her fingers over the lily that was carved into the inkstone. Then she stroked the bristles
of the brush.
“What fine art supplies!” she exclaimed .with admiration. “You must be good at painting.”
Mieko did not answer. She put the treasures away. She could not bear to tell Yoshi about how she
had lost the fifth treasure. Mieko was sure that Yoshi would not like a girl with so much hatred inside
of her.
To change the subject, Mieko took Yoshi to the garden where they puzzled over the words on
Grandpa’s rock.
As Yoshi was leaving, she asked, “Are you going to school tomorrow?”
Mieko wasn’t sure she was ready for school, but she didn’t want to say no to Yoshi.
“Maybe.”
By suppertime she had made up her mind. Mieko stopped eating her noodle soup and said, “I think
I’ll go to school tomorrow.”
Her grandparents looked up, surprised.
“Grandpa,” Mieko went on, her dark eyes serious. “I’m beginning to understand the words on your
rock. They mean that I should not worry about my scar, or about going back to school.”
He pulled her close to him.
“I do believe you are becoming wise,” he said with a chuckle. “You are learning to accept things
you cannot change. And most important, you are accepting yourself—scars and all.”
After the dishes were washed and put away, they sat and talked—all smiling—until the stars came
out.
At bedtime Mieko stared at her face in the mirror. It was plain and round, framed by black hair and
bangs. That was all. Mieko wished that a tiny bit of goodness showed in her face like it did in
Yoshi’s.
This time, as she was falling asleep, there was no sick feeling at the thought of school, and her
throat was not so tight. It was as if she was coming into the light after being in a dark tunnel. Maybe
everything was going to be all right.
SEVEN
THE CONTEST
As soon as Mieko entered the classroom, she knew that something was different. Everyone was
smiling—except Akira, who scowled at her from his new place in the front row under the teacher’s
nose.
“We are happy to see you back, Mieko,” Miss Suzuki said pleasantly, as if nothing out of the
ordinary had happened.
