After that, school went surprisingly well. Mieko managed to write her lessons with a pencil. Miss
Suzuki looked pleased. In composition class, Mieko wrote her first letter home.
Dear Mother and Father,
I have a new friend, Yoshi, and I like school. My hand is still sore, so my writing isn’t good. I
haven’t painted with my brush yet. I miss you, too.
Love,
Mieko
One day, in her bedroom, Mieko opened the drawer and brought out her four treasures. Sitting on a
cushion, she rubbed the inkstick onto the wetted inkstone. When the ink was black and thick enough,
Mieko picked up the brush and began to make the stroke for “one.” She felt like a small child learning
to write for the first time.
Holding a pencil hadn’t hurt much, but a flash of pain went through her hand when she pressed the
brush hard onto the paper. Mieko caught her breath and finished the stroke. She frowned at the
crooked line. It didn’t look at all like the graceful bone stroke that she had made perfectly countless
times before.
Grandma came in and bent over for a look. Mieko tried to cover the paper, but Grandma had
already seen the sloppy “one.”
“Here.” Grandma took the brush and smoothly painted the stroke. “So—that is the way it goes,” she
said. “Now you try again.”
Without a word, Mieko cleaned the brush and inkstone and put the four treasures away. Of course
she knew how the stroke should look. Why didn’t Grandma know that?
Mieko and Yoshi began spending more and more time together.
“You girls are as close as a pair of chopsticks, ” Grandpa said.
Sometimes, after school, Mieko took Yoshi to her secret place. Inside the pipe they sat and
watched the hermit crabs skittering crazily around on the sand. Or they collected tiny shells, and
pebbles worn smooth by the waves.
They wandered up the mountain, gathering yellow and gold leaves for Grandma and for Yoshi’s
Aunt Hisako. Mieko loved the mellow autumn colors that spread over the earth and trees. Often they
flung themselves down onto the grass, looking at the sky, trying to find animals in the puffy clouds.
Mieko was forgetting the loneliness that used to bring her to the mountain and to the shore.
All the while they kept an eye out for Tengu.
“He has probably gone underground for the winter,” Yoshi said with a giggle.
As they raced back down the mountain, they sang,
“Tengu’s nose grows and grows. Tengu’s feet—red as a beet!”
The folktale demon became their private joke. During dull history classes they passed notes to each
other, adding more lines to their song. Then they hid their faces behind their books and tried not to
laugh.
There was a touch of winter in the air when Miss Suzuki made an announcement.
“Our school is having a calligraphy contest on the last day before the New Year’s holidays. It will
be for those students who paint word-pictures with a brush. At the last minute, I will write the contest
word on the blackboard. The one who paints the word with the most artistic brushstrokes will win.
Those brushstrokes will be copied onto a brass square and fastened to the big rock in the
schoolyard.”
“Let’s enter the contest!” Yoshi said eagerly.
Mieko shook her head. How could she think of entering a contest when she couldn’t even paint the
easiest strokes?
“Please!” coaxed Yoshi. “It will be fun. Besides, none of us had calligraphy lessons during the
war, and you studied brush-painting for a long time.” She pulled on Mieko’s sleeve. “You have a
better chance to win than any of us.”
“Oh, yes!” Mieko thought bitterly. “I’ve had lessons, but they are all wasted.”
She glanced at Yoshi’s delicate fingers. How could she compete against someone like her? And all
the others with their perfect hands? Worst of all, Mieko knew that she would never win without the
special magic of the fifth treasure.
But Yoshi talked about the contest all the way home and into Mieko’s yard. Grandma was washing
clothes in a big tub. She lifted a shirt, then slapped it hard against the washboard to get the dirt out.
Slap! Slap!
“There’s an art contest at school,” Yoshi told her, “and I think Mieko should try.”
Grandma stopped working, her wet red hands on her hips.
“I think so, too.” She looked hard at Mieko. “Your parents would be so proud ... ”
“No!” Mieko said quickly. “I’m not ready.” She paused. “I ... I can’t.”
And that was the end of it. At least, so Mieko thought.
EIGHT
AUNT HISAKO
One crisp fall day, Yoshi announced, “I’m having a tea party on Sunday. And I want you to come.”
Mieko was wildly excited. She was sure Yoshi’s house would be like a castle in a fairy tale.
On the special day Grandma did not go out to the fields to help Grandpa harvest rice. Instead, she
stayed home to make certain that Mieko was properly dressed for the important occasion. She tied a
blue ribbon in Mieko’s hair, knotting it so tightly that Mieko yelled. Grandma puffed out the bow and
smoothed Mieko’s best skirt.
“Mieko, where is your clean hankie?”
Mieko pulled it from her pocket.
“Don’t forget to use it,” Grandma said. She gave one last pat to the dress. “There! You are ready.”
At Yoshi’s house Mieko stood in front of the tall closed gate. Off to one side was a small door.
After a few minutes Mieko worked up enough courage to knock lightly on it. At first there was
silence. Mieko knocked louder.
Soon she heard the clatter of geta inside the yard.
“It’s me, Mieko,” she called, giving a polite bow even though nobody could see her.
The small door opened and Yoshi stuck her head out. “I knew it was you,” she said, laughing.
“Come on in.”
At the entrance the girls removed their clogs and donned slippers to walk down the hall. As they
flip-flopped along, Mieko’s big slippers kept falling off. She was glad when they reached the sliding
door of the living room so that she could step barefoot onto the tatami.
Mieko caught her breath with wonder. The room was so big—eight mats! Silk cushions were
waiting near a low table. Mieko’s mouth watered when she saw cookies and cakes beside a teapot
and matching cups. She hoped they could eat soon.
“Do sit down,” Yoshi said in a grown-up hostess voice.
Mieko tucked her feet under her and sat opposite Yoshi. At home she sometimes sprawled, but here
she was extra ladylike so as not to shame Grandma.
In the silence the clock on the wall ticked loudly. Mieko looked at the pictures that hung in the
alcove and above the door. She liked the black ink dragon best. The artist’s brushstrokes flicked and
skipped across the paper, making the dragon come alive. Mieko could almost feel the heat from its
fiery breath.
The other painting was a poem in calligraphy that said, “In the midst of the world’s corruption, a
heart of pure white jade.”
Mieko wondered what corruption meant.
Suddenly, Yoshi said, “We don’t have to be so quiet. It’s just us, alone.”
Mieko grinned, and soon they were eating the sweets and chattering about school.
Mieko had crammed the last cake into her mouth when a slim, elegant woman padded into the
room. She was dressed in a green silk kimono with peonies on it and a brocade sash that glittered
with gold threads. Her glossy black hair was pulled back into a soft bun.
