Mieko had crammed the last cake into her mouth when a slim, elegant woman padded into the
room. She was dressed in a green silk kimono with peonies on it and a brocade sash that glittered
with gold threads. Her glossy black hair was pulled back into a soft bun.
Mieko stared at her face—so beautiful and smooth, as if she did have a heart of pure white jade.
“Aunt Hisako, this is my best friend, Mieko,” Yoshi said.
Aunt Hisako flashed a cool smile in Mieko’s direction and lowered herself gracefully onto a
cushion.
“When you have finished eating, little stranger, you may call me Aunt Hisako,” she said primly.
“By the way, young ladies in this house chew each bite thirty times.”
While the girls chewed and chewed, Aunt Hisako asked Mieko, “What is your favorite subject at
school?”
Mieko had lost count of the chewing, but she was sure that she had done at least thirty, so she
swallowed and answered, “The reading class, Aunt Hisako.”
Mieko’s leg began to go numb and she tried hard not to wriggle. When she could not stand the pins
and needles tingling any longer, Mieko sneaked a hand down and rubbed her leg.
Aunt Hisako’s eyebrows lifted disapprovingly. She began to talk about calligraphy, using big
words that Mieko did not understand.
“Do you paint word-pictures?” Mieko asked meekly.
“Heavens no!” Aunt Hisako replied in her deep voice. “I am only a scholar of brush-painting. In
other words, I study the work of famous writing masters. It gives me great pleasure.” She fixed her
eyes on Mieko. “I suppose you will try to win the school contest, too?”
Mieko shook her head.
“I’m too clumsy.”
“Nonsense!” Aunt Hisako threw up her pale hands. “Clumsiness is in your mind. Besides, your
hand looks almost completely healed. So that is no excuse.”
“But ... ” began Mieko, wondering how best to explain to Aunt Hisako about the lost fifth treasure.
“Little stranger,” Aunt Hisako said, “have you not heard of the holy priest, Kobo Daishi, who could
paint the most exquisite word-pictures? And not only with his right hand.”
Mieko shook her head.
“With his left hand,” Aunt Hisako continued, “or holding a brush between the toes of his right foot,
or between the toes of his left foot, or even between his teeth.”
Mieko was speechless, trying to imagine what the priest looked like painting with his feet.
“If he can do that, little stranger,” Aunt Hisako said sharply, “you can surely paint with one hand.”
Mieko shifted uneasily on the cushion, wishing that she had not come. She wondered how long she
would have to live in the village before Aunt Hisako stopped calling her a stranger.
“Nothing in life is easy,” Aunt Hisako said, rising to her feet. “You don’t want to be a coward, do
you?”
A coward!
The word thudded inside of Mieko’s head. For the first time in weeks the old tightness was back in
her throat. She sat there with her head bowed.
“Why don’t you look at me?” asked Aunt Hisako. “Do I scare you?”
“A little,” Mieko said in a low voice. “But I have seen lots of other frightening things.”
Aunt Hisako almost smiled.
“So I am a frightening thing?”
Mieko didn’t know what to say.
Aunt Hisako turned, saying, “It’s time for my nap.” As she wafted out of the room she pulled a
book from a shelf in the corner. She opened it to show them an illustration, then closed it with a snap
that made Mieko jump.
“You may take this book home,” Aunt Hisako said. “If you study the brushstrokes on these pages,
and practice, one of you might win the prize. Remember, a gem, unless polished, does not glitter.”
“Thank you, Aunt Hisako,” the girls said in chorus, bowing until their heads almost touched the
tatami.
After she left, Yoshi said, “I’m really sorry. Aunt Hisako sounds terrifying, but she only wants to
help.”
On the way home Mieko thought about what Aunt Hisako had said. She didn’t want to be a coward.
But how could she try to win the contest without the fifth treasure?
She dutifully told Grandma every detail about Yoshi’s grand house and the tea party and Aunt
Hisako—everything except the coward part.
But that night she lay awake for a long time. She couldn’t forget what Aunt Hisako had said.
As her eyes were closing, Mieko whispered, “I will enter the contest. Even if I have no chance of
winning. That will show her I’m not a coward.”
NINE
FRIENDSHIP
There was one thing about the contest that Mieko did not understand. It buzzed around in her head like
a pesky fly all through breakfast.
“You are unusually quiet,” Grandpa said. “What’s on your mind?”
“Well ...” Mieko tried to explain. “If two students paint the contest word the same way, who will
win?”
Grandpa rubbed the gray stubble on his chin.
“I don’t think that is possible,” he said slowly. “The wetness, dryness, and speed of one artist’s
brushstrokes will be different from anyone else’s. Painting a word-picture is much like playing the
piano. No two expert musicians will play a piece of music in exactly the same way.”
He opened Aunt Hisako’s book and pointed out some of the masterpieces of calligraphy.
“Here is the word-picture for ‘happiness.’ It looks quite different when painted by two great
artists, doesn’t it? They each have a fifth treasure, but their own personalities and styles show up in
their work.
Mieko pored over the pages.
“You must paint not what the eye sees,” Grandpa said, “but what the heart knows. If your heart has
beauty, so will your painting. Do you understand?”
Mieko nodded. “Sort of.”
Grandpa smiled broadly.
“Does your question mean that you will enter the contest?”
“Yes, Grandpa,” she said, not telling him her reasons.
Grandma turned from the sink. She came over and held out her arms. Mieko buried her face in the
clean-smelling apron and hugged Grandma hard.
“That’s my brave girl!” Grandma said. “Imagine how proud your parents will be to see your
brushstrokes on that brass square!”
Mieko was silent. She wondered if the family would be proud of her even when she lost. Because
she surely would.
That same afternoon she and Yoshi began to work on their brushstrokes. Yoshi opened Aunt
Hisako’s book at the beginning so that they could copy the Japanese word-pictures of the masters.
They sat on their knees with sheets of newspaper spread out on the floor before them. They
covered the papers with rows of black strokes. Some were like teardrops, others like mouse tails,
stork legs, tiger paws, swords and bones. They made hundreds of them.
Yoshi painted with small, neat, even strokes. But Mieko’s were large—thick and thin, fast and
slow—sweeping across the page. To make up for the stiffness in her hand, she used her whole body
while painting.
While they worked, Mieko told Yoshi stories about the word-pictures. Her old art teacher had
always told stories during class.
“Here are the two parts of the word-picture for house,” Mieko said, drawing the strokes. “The first
