part means ‘roof’ and the second means ‘pig.’ ”
Yoshi laughed, delighted.
“Imagine putting a pig inside of a house!”
“My teacher said that in the old days people did keep pigs in their houses,” Mieko said. “And that
is why we draw the word-picture like this.”
Yoshi made a face.
“Ugh! Thank goodness we don’t have pigs inside anymore”
“And look at this!” Mieko quickly painted the word-picture for “love.” “One part means ‘woman’
and the other stands for ‘child,’ ” she explained. “Put three women together and we get a word-
picture that means ‘noise.’ See?”
“I never thought of that!” Yoshi exclaimed. “But it isn’t fair. Three men are noisy, too!”
Between the stories and the practicing, the days flew by.
Soon the rains turned to icy sleet that sounded like thunder on the roof. In the dark, frosty hours
after school, Mieko and Yoshi often moved to a low table that had a kotatsu heater underneath it.
Grandma had placed a quilt over the table to keep the warmth in. They put their cold hands and feet
under the quilt until they thawed out. Then they went back to practicing.
Grandma kept a plate of cookies nearby.
“To keep your strength up,” she said, her eyes crinkled in a smile.
She sat beside them with her knitting basket. The steady click, click of her needles made quiet
music. Sometimes she shooed Yoshi and Mieko outside for a breath of fresh air and some exercise.
“You must give your eyes a rest,” she said wisely.
In their heavy coats, mittens, boots and scarves, they went out into the yard where there was a
sprinkling of snow. It glinted like diamonds in the soft light that shone through the paper-paned doors.
Even out there Mieko grabbed a stick and made strokes in the snow until Yoshi stopped her.
“This is play time!” she yelled. “I’ll race you to the comer!”
Slipping and sliding along the icy road, they shouted their Tengu song.
“Tengu’s nose grows and grows,
Tengu’s feet—red as a beet.
Tengu’s paws have awful claws,
Tengu’s head—full of lead!”
Weak with laughter, Mieko and Yoshi fell down in a tangled heap of arms and legs.
TEN
HOPE
One evening, Mieko was struggling with the difficult strokes for “feast.” She tried again and again,
but they didn’t come out right. Mieko tried thinking about good food—moon buns with bits of pork
inside, buckwheat noodles, fried beef and vegetables—until her mouth watered. All at once her brush
fairly flew over the paper.
Mieko sat back and studied the word-picture. It was better. The door to her private magical world
was opening just a crack. Perhaps a little bit of beauty had crept back into her heart. But would
enough of the fifth treasure come back to make the strokes perfect and full of feeling? In time for the
contest?
There was only one way to find out. Practice. And Mieko decided to work as hard as she could,
even when her hand ached terribly. Then, if the fifth treasure did not return, she would give up
calligraphy forever.
Sometimes she turned out two or three almost correct word-pictures in a day. Other times she felt
like crying when the strokes were all wrong: the ink was too thick, or too thin, or one stroke was
wiggly, or the whole thing was lopsided like a leaky boat.
At bedtime, Grandpa adjusted his glasses and inspected Mieko’s practice papers. He held them out
at arm’s length, then in close for a more careful look. He compared her brushstrokes to those in Aunt
Hisako’s book.
“Hm-m-m,” he said. “That teardrop is too fat ... the sword must have a sharper edge ... the
elephant’s leg should be stronger. And remember that all parts of a word-picture must fit together the
way parts of your body fit.”
Mieko sagged. It seemed hopeless, but the next day she continued practicing.
The class was growing more excited as the contest drew near. Miss Suzuki asked the artists to
bring samples of their painting to school. As the papers were passed around, everyone admired
Mieko’s large, artistic brushstrokes—even Akira.
“Phew!” he whistled. “I wouldn’t work that hard for a million yen!”
He grinned at Mieko and she smiled back. She thought that he really had a nice smile when he
wasn’t making nasty faces.
However, in spite of the long practice hours, Mieko knew that there was still something missing
from her word-pictures.
Even Grandpa agreed.
“Your word-pictures are correct,” he said, thoughtfully, “but somehow they seem to lack the spark
of life. It is almost as if they were printed by a machine.”
Two fat tears squeezed out of Mieko’s eyes and rolled down her cheeks. All of her work was for
nothing.
“It’s no use!” she cried. “The fifth treasure is gone for good.”
Grandpa leaned close. “The fifth treasure isn’t something you can lose, like misplacing a shoe or
sock.”
“But ever since the bomb ... ”
Grandpa reached over and wiped away her tears.
“That bomb hurt many people, Mieko. And it hurt your hand. But what’s inside of you—the bomb
cannot touch that. Perhaps you are trying too hard. The solution might be to give yourself and your
brush a rest.”
“I can’t! ” cried Mieko. “The contest is only a few days away.”
He cupped her face in his strong hands and looked deeply into her eyes.
“Listen, Mieko dear. You would not be able to dance well if you had just raced a mile, would you?
It is the same with calligraphy. You must be fresh to give it your best.”
Mieko drew a deep breath.
“All right,” she said wearily.
The next day she took a vacation from painting. She tried to put the contest out of her mind and think
only about the New Year’s celebrations. Mieko helped Grandma clean the house so that every speck
of dust would be gone before the next year began.
In the afternoon a letter arrived from home.
Dear Mieko,
I do hope you will enter the contest. The practice will be good for your hand. And I know that
the beauty in your heart will again blossom like the peach tree in our garden. Then your brush will
feel as though it is dancing across the paper. I’m sure of it—as sure as bamboo bends in the wind.
Love,
Mother
Mieko read the letter many times. She read it in her room and at school. But she was still unsure of
herself. She couldn’t believe her brush would ever dance across the paper again. Deep down, her
worries about the fifth treasure grew.
ELEVEN
THE TREASURE
The night before the contest, Mieko dreamed that the family was once more together. They were
having a picnic under a cherry tree that was blooming like a pink cloud. Mieko was writing a poem
about the flowers with her brush. And the word-pictures were full of life.
Gusts of wind began rustling the branches with a whish, whish, whish. When morning came, the
