sound of rustling turned into a sweeping. Grandma’s broom was scraping against the floor of the
entrance hall.
Mieko tried to burrow back into her wonderful dream. But it was gone. Shivering in the cold, she
hurriedly pulled on her clothes.
She had just gulped down her breakfast when Yoshi came by. Her face was rosy from the cold and
the excitement. Yoshi was holding something behind her back.
“Guess what I’ve got!” she said, hopping on one foot, then the other, trying not to tell the secret.
Mieko couldn’t help laughing.
“I can’t guess.”
“Then close your eyes,” ordered Yoshi, “while I take off the wrapping. ”
Mieko covered her eyes. There was the crackling of paper. Too curious to wait, Mieko peeked.
Yoshi was unrolling a sheet of hand-made rice paper.
“Ohhh!” Mieko breathed. She was certain that it was the finest paper made in all of Japan. It was
pale cream with a few nubby threads running through. She felt a twinge of jealousy.
“Wherever did you get it, Yoshi?”
“Aunt Hisako. She ordered it from a store in Tokyo.”
“I’m glad for you.” Mieko choked out the words.
Yoshi’s eyes twinkled when she said, “The paper is not for me.” She laughed at Mieko’s open-
mouthed surprise. “It’s for you.”
Mieko stood there—stunned—and ashamed of her jealousy.
Yoshi smiled. “You’re the one with the real talent, Mieko. My brushstrokes are just plain and
ordinary.
“But—” Mieko began to argue. “But you can’t ... ”
“No more buts!” Yoshi broke in. “All I want is for you to use this paper. Aunt Hisako said so.
Promise!”
When Mieko hesitated, Yoshi stuck out her hand. “Promise!”
Finally, Mieko nodded and they crooked little fingers as they always did to seal a promise.
At school, desks in Miss Suzuki’s classroom had been cleared away so that the artists could sit on
cushions at low tables. The twenty contestants filed in silently and sat down.
All eyes were on the blackboard where Miss Suzuki would write the contest word.
Mieko’s hands shook as she arranged the inkstone, waterholder, inkstick and brush on the table. As
she ground the ink, the rhythmic rub, rub, rub calmed her, and she stopped trembling. Then Mieko
spread out the soft white paper.
Miss Suzuki wrote the word:
friendship
At that moment the classroom seemed to fade as Mieko concentrated on the word. Inside her
magical world—a world where lines and shapes came to life—she saw only the paper and her brush.
In her mind’s eye she pictured each stroke. Friendship was Yoshi.
All of Mieko’s love for her went into the strong, sure brushstrokes. And every one of the fifteen
strokes had the energy of a living thing.
Mieko painted the word so quickly that it was as though her hand had been guided. And the brush
really did dance across the paper—just as it used to.
Floating in a dream, Mieko put her paper on Miss Suzuki’s desk, put on her warm coat, and walked
out of the room.
She stood in the quiet schoolyard, the cold air on her cheeks. Happiness washed over her. She had
the fifth treasure again. There was no doubt.
Yoshi ran up and grabbed her arm.
“What happened? Why do you look so strange?”
Her eyes shining, Mieko said, “The brush danced. It really did.”
“I bet you win!” shrieked Yoshi.
“If I do,” Mieko said quietly, “it will be thanks to you. When I thought of friendship, I thought of
you. That’s what I painted. ”
Yoshi put her hand on top of the big rock as they walked past it.
“If you win, and your brushstrokes are on this rock,” she said sadly, “everyone will always
remember you. Especially me.” She squeezed Mieko’s arm. “I’ll miss you a lot.”
Mieko blinked away the tears that came when she thought of leaving her best friend.
“When I got here, all I wanted was to go back home. Now it’s hard to leave.”
“But we can write letters,” said Yoshi, brightening. “And maybe you can come back for the
summer holidays. ”
“Yes!” cried Mieko. “And we can go to the beach and hide in our secret place ... ”
“And look for Tengu again!” added Yoshi.
They burst out laughing. Then, hand-in-hand, they hurried home through the softly falling snow.
Author’s Note
When writing developed in China and Japan thousands of years ago, people did not use letters as we
know them but pictures to explain what they meant. The pictures, which today are called “characters,”
have changed very little over the centuries. They are made up of strokes which, in everyday writing,
are produced with pens or pencils. But the Japanese believe that picture-writing with a brush can be
great art, and this is the kind of artist Mieko wanted to be.
Many Japanese characters still look almost like what they mean. “Mountain” looks like a mountain:
And “tree” looks something like a tree:
Other words, like “friendship,” are more complicated. The everyday way to write “friendship” is like
this:
When painted with a brush, the word-picture looks like this:
This is how the word-picture looked when Mieko put her feelings for Yoshi into the prizewinning
brushstrokes.
