	Edmond was not moving. 'Is he dead?' Jacopo thought.

	After some time Dantes opened his eyes. 'My knee hurts very badly,' he said, 'and my head and my legs feel heavy.'

	They wanted to carry him to the shore. But when they touched him, he gave a cry of pain. 'Don't move me!' he cried.

	'The pain is too great.'

	He did not want any food, but he told the other men to have their meal. 'I only need to rest,' he said. 'When you return, I will feel better.' The sailors went away.

	They returned an hour later. 'He is not getting better,' one of the sailors said. 'His pain seems to be worse.'

	'I must sail this morning,' the captain said to Dantes. 'Won't you try to get up?'

	Dantes tried to stand up, but each time he fell back. With each fall he cried out with pain.

	'He has broken his leg,' the captain said in a low voice. 'But he is a very good man, and we can't leave him. We will try to carry him on board the ship.'

	'No,' Dantes said. 'The pain is too bad. Don't move me. Leave me here.'

	'No,' said the captain, 'we won't leave until evening. I don't want people to think that we left a good man like you on this empty island.'

	But Dantes told him to go. 'No, no,' he said to the captain. 'I was stupid, and I must suffer for my mistake. Leave me a small amount of food and an axe. I will build myself a hut.'

	The captain turned towards his ship. It was waiting just off the shore, ready for sea. 'What shall we do?' he asked. 'We can't leave you here; but we can't stay.'

	'Go. Please go,' cried Dantes.

	'We will be away for more than a week,' the captain said. 'Then we will make a special journey to get you.'

	Dantes spoke again. 'If, in two or three days, you see a fishing boat, ask them to come here for me. I will pay them to take me to Livorno. If you don't meet a fishing boat, please come back for me.'

	'Listen, Captain,' said Jacopo. 'I will stay with him.'

	'You will say goodbye to your part of the money from this business to stay with me?'

	'Yes,' said Jacopo immediately.

	A strange look passed over Dantes face. He pressed Jacopo's hand. 'You are a good, kind-hearted friend,' he said to Jacopo.

	'God will love you for your kindness. But I don't want anyone to stay with me. I will be all right.'

	The men left the things that Edmond wanted. Then they went back to the ship. Two or three times they turned round and waved to him, and Edmond waved back.

	'They are rough, dangerous men,' Dantes said to himself, 'but they are good friends.'

	He pulled himself up carefully to the top of the rock. He watched the ship leave. Like a beautiful white bird, it sailed out over the sea.



	Chapter fourteen

	Treasure

	Edmond climbed carefully down from the rocks.

	'I didn't really fall. I wanted the men to leave me here. I don't want to fall and hurt myself now!' he thought.

	He followed the line of marks on the stones again. They started from a small place on the shore. Only a small ship could land there. 'But Spada's boat landed here,' Dantes said to himself. The marks ended at the large round rock.

	'But,' thought Edmond,' how did Prince Spada lift this heavy rock into this place? Twenty men couldn't move a rock like this.' Suddenly a thought came to him. 'They didn't lift this rock into its place - it fell here!'

	He jumped from the rock to look at the ground above it.

	'Somebody cut a path here, and moved the rock down it. They put a large stone here to hold it in its place. Now the stone is almost hidden by the grass. But the rock does not fit perfectly. The holes are full of small stones and earth.'

	Dantes cut away these small stones at the top, and after ten minutes he put his arm into the hole. He took his axe and cut wood from a strong tree. Then he put one end of the wood into the hole and pulled on the other. The rock moved. Again he pulled. The rock moved from its place, and then fell back again. Dantes rested. He gave a last, strong pull. The rock fell down the hill into the sea.

	In the place of the rock, Dantes saw a large square stone, with a ring in the centre of it. He felt weak, so he waited for a minute. Then he put the wood into the ring and lifted the stone. He saw steps going down into the darkness of an underground room.

	But there was some light down there, and the air was fresh. Both the light and air came in through small holes in the rock above his head. Dantes looked into the comers of the underground room. There was nothing in them.

	He remembered the words of the letter: 'Break into the second room.' He was in the first room, and he must now find the second room. He began to hit the wall with his axe. In one place the sound of the axe was a little different. He hit it again. The hard rock broke away easily. Behind it there was a wall of square white stones.

	'Somebody built this opening. Then they painted it to look like rock,' Dantes thought.

	He felt very weak. He put the axe on the ground and went up the steps, out into the open air.

	'I have not eaten any food for hours. I am not hungry, but I must eat.' He ate a little bread and took a drink from his water bottle. Then he returned. He was able to use the axe more easily now.

	'This wall in front of me is only made of stones, one on top of another.' He pulled them off, one by one. Finally, Dantes broke the wall into the second room. It was smaller and darker than the first one. He waited for fresh air to fill the room. Then he went in.

	There was a dark corner to the left of the opening. He looked round this second room. 'If there is treasure,' he thought, 'it is hidden in that dark corner.'

	Dantes went to the comer and began to move the earth. Suddenly, his axe hit a hard place. He lifted the axe to hit the place again. Again he heard the same sound.

	'It is a great wooden chest. There are strong pieces of metal round it,' he thought, finally. He went outside.

	There, he stood and thought. Then he took a dry piece of wood, lit it, and went down again. He looked at the top of the chest. It was about a metre long and half a metre wide. In the centre, there was a piece of silver in the wood. There was a mark on the silver - the mark of the Spada family.

	'The treasure is here!' Dantes thought. He tried to lift the box but he couldn't. He tried to open it, but there was no key. He took his axe to break it open. The top came away; the wood was old and soft.

	There were three smaller boxes inside. In the first box there were gold coins from many different countries. In the second box were bars of gold. From the third box, Edmond took a handful of gold rings.

	He touched, felt and looked at the treasure. Then Edmond ran quickly back to the steps. He jumped up on a rock and looked out at the sea. He was alone - alone with this great treasure! Was he awake - or was it a dream?



	Chapter fifteen

