	Dantes turned into a narrow street and went into a small house.

	'My dear Edmond,' cried his father. 'My boy, my son! You are here in Marseilles! Tell me all your news.'

	'I have some sad news. The good Captain Leclerc is dead. But I am now captain of the Pharaoh! Just think! I am only twenty years old and the captain of a great ship. I will earn good money. I can buy you a new house. What is the matter, father? Aren't you well?'

	'It is nothing,' his father said.

	'You need food and a drink. Where will I find food and drink for you?'

	'There is nothing in the house,' answered the old man. 'But I don't need anything, because you are here.'

	'When I left, three months ago, I gave you plenty of money,' Dantes said.

	'Yes. But I paid some money back to our friend Caderousse. He asked me for it.'

	'But you gave Caderousse more than half of the money! Why did you do that? Here, father, take this and send for some food.' Edmond put all his money on the table.

	'No, no,' said the old man. 'I don't need all that money. But here comes Caderousse. He knows that you are home. He wants to welcome you.'

	'Hello! You have returned, Edmond?' Caderousse said.

	'Yes, neighbour,' replied Dantes. He tried to hide his real feelings. 'I am ready to help you in any way.'

	'You are rich now,' said Caderousse, looking hungrily at the money on the table.

	'Oh that,' said Dantes. 'That is my father's money. But of course, you are our neighbour. If you want money, we will lend it to you.'

	'Thank you, but I don't need anything. I met my friend Danglars. So I heard that you were here. I wanted to see you.'

	'Good Caderousse!' said the old man. 'He is a great friend to us.'

	There was an ugly look on Caderousse's face. 'Well, Morrel is pleased with you,' he said. 'Are you hoping to be the next captain of the Pharaoh?'

	'Yes. I believe that I will be the next captain. But, dear father, I must leave you. Now I must visit another person in the town.'

	'Go, my dear boy. And God protect your wife.'

	'His wife!' said Caderousse. 'She isn't his wife yet. Mercedes is a fine girl, and fine girls have plenty of young men. But, you will be captain of the Pharaoh, so-'

	'My opinion of women - and of Mercedes - is better than yours,' Dantes said. 'I know that she will always love me.'

	Edmond left the house, and Caderousse joined Danglars. The seaman was waiting for him at the corner.

	'He isn't captain yet,' said Danglars quietly. 'We can stop him. Let's go. We will stop at "La Reserve" and drink a glass of wine there.'

	'Right, then,' Caderousse said. 'But you must pay for the drink.'



	Chapter three

	Mercedes

	Danglars and Caderousse sat at a table under a tree. In a house about a hundred metres away, a young girl was at the window. Her hair was as black as night, and her eyes were as dark and wonderful as the shadow of a forest.

	'Mercedes!' a voice shouted happily outside the house. 'Mercedes!'

	'Ah!' cried the girl. And she ran to the door and opened it. 'Here, Edmond, here I am!'

	Edmond took Mercedes in his arms. The golden sunshine of Marseilles shone on them. They were together, the only two people in the world.

	Edmond and Mercedes walked past 'La Reserve'. Caderousse and Danglars were still there.

	'Hey, Edmond!' cried Caderousse. He got up from his seat. 'Are you too proud to speak to your friends?'

	'No, my dear man!' Dantes replied. 'I am not proud, but I am happy. I was thinking about Mercedes.'

	'When is the wedding?' asked Danglars.

	'Soon - tomorrow or the next day, here at "La Reserve". We hope that you and Caderousse will be there.'

	'Tomorrow or the next day! You are in a hurry, captain,' said Danglars.

	'I am not a captain yet, Danglars,' said Dantes. 'But, yes, we are in a hurry because I must go to Paris.'

	'To Paris! Do you have business there?'

	'It is not my business. Captain Leclerc asked me to finish some work for him.'

	'Yes, yes, I understand,' said Danglars. And he added, speaking to himself, 'To Paris - he is taking Marshal Bertrand's letter there. Ah!

	I have an idea. Dantes, my friend, you are not captain of the Pharaoh yet!' He turned towards Edmond. 'A good journey!' he cried.

	'Thank you, my friend,' said Edmond. And the two lovers continued on their happy path.

	'Boy,' shouted Danglars, 'bring me a pen and paper.'

	'It is a strange thought,' said Caderousse. 'You can kill a man with a knife, but you can also kill him with that pen!'

	'I will tell you what I am going to do,' said Danglars. 'Dantes has just returned from a journey. He stopped at the island of Elba. We are going to send a letter to an officer of the government. We will write that Dantes is working for Napoleon. He wants to bring Napoleon back as ruler of France.'

	Danglars wrote, using his left hand:



	A friend of the king has information for the king's officers. Edmond Dantes, of the ship Pharaoh, brought a letter from Elba to the followers of Napoleon in Paris. You will find the letter in his coat, or at his father's house, or in his room on the ship.



