	He put the letter in an envelope and wrote a name on it: Villefort.

	'So, I have done it,' Danglars said.

	'Yes, you have done it,' said Caderousse. 'But it is a dirty piece of work.' He put out his hand to take the letter.

	***

	The cooks at 'La Reserve' prepared a wonderful meal for the wedding. Many of the men from the Pharaoh were there, and other friends of Dantes.

	'Shall we start?' asked the sweet silvery voice of Mercedes. 'We must go to the church.'

	Everyone in the party stood up and began to form a line.

	Suddenly, there was a loud noise. A man knocked on the door and shouted, 'Open this door, in the name of the law!'

	An officer came in. There were four soldiers with him.

	'Where is Edmond Dantes?'

	'That is my name,' said Edmond. 'Why?'

	'I can't tell you. Someone will tell you the reason later.'

	'Don't be afraid, my good friends,' said Dantes. 'They are making a mistake. That is all, I am sure.'

	Dantes went into the courtyard with the soldiers.

	'God go with you, my dearest,' cried Mercedes.

	'And with you, sweet Mercedes. We shall soon meet again.'



	Chapter four

	The Judge

	Villefort, the judge, took a paper from one of the men. He said, 'Bring in the prisoner.'

	Dantes came into the room. 'Who and what are you?' Villefort asked.

	'My name is Edmond Dantes,' the young man replied. 'I am an officer of the Pharaoh, one of Morrel's ships.'

	'Your age?'

	'Twenty.'

	'Where were you when the soldiers came?'

	'I was at my wedding.' Dantes' voice was full of tears. Earlier in the day he was so happy and now...

	'It is sad that this man missed his wedding,' thought Villefort. But he continued: 'Do you work for Napoleon?'

	'I wanted to join one of his ships, but he lost power.'

	'People think that you are a dangerous man. They say you want to bring Napoleon back to power.'

	'Me? Dangerous! I am only twenty. I don't know about things like power. I love my father, I love Morrel, and most of all I love Mercedes. That is all that I can tell you.'

	'Have you any enemies?'

	'Enemies?' said Dantes. 'Only important men have enemies. I am not important.'

	'True, you are only twenty,' Villefort said. 'But you will soon be captain of a ship. You are marrying a pretty girl. Does someone hate you because you are so lucky?'

	'Perhaps. I don't know. You know men better than I do.'

	'I received this letter. Do you know the writing?'

	Dantes read it. A cloud of sadness passed over his face.

	'No, I don't know the writing. But the writer of this letter is a real enemy.'

	'Now,' said the judge, 'answer me. Are the words in this letter true?'

	'No,' Dantes replied. 'I will tell you the facts. Captain Leclerc became ill soon after we left Naples. On the third day he was very ill. He called me and said, "Promise me something. It is very important." I promised. "After my death, you will become captain. Go to Elba and ask for Marshal Bertrand. Give him this letter, and he will give you another letter. He will tell you where to take it. "That is what Captain Leclerc said.'

	'And what did you do then?' the judge asked.

	'I agreed. Leclerc was dying. On a ship, the last request of an officer is an order. I reached Elba and I went on shore alone. I gave the letter to Marshal Bertrand. He gave me a letter to take to a person in Paris. I came here, visited Mercedes and prepared for my wedding. I am going to Paris tomorrow.'

	'Ah,' said Villefort. 'Perhaps you were unwise, but you followed the last orders of your captain. Give me the letter that you brought from Elba. Promise to see me again if I call you. You can go back to your friends now.'

	'I am free, then?' said Dantes happily.

	'Yes, but first give me the letter.'

	'You have it already. The soldiers took it with some other letters. They are on the table.'

	'Stop,' said Villefort, as Dantes took his hat. 'Whose name and address are on the letter?'

	'Noirtier, Heron Road, Paris.'

	Villefort's face went white, and he looked afraid. 'Noirtier!' he said in a weak voice. 'Noirtier!'

	'Yes. Do you know him?'

	'No,' replied Villefort. 'I am a true follower of the king. I don't know men who want to destroy him.'

