	'Oh, ho!' cried the guard, stepping back. 'You are going crazy. We will have trouble with you. But there are plenty of places underground.'

	He went out. A few minutes later, he returned with four soldiers.

	'The governor has sent orders,' he said. He turned to the soldiers. 'This prisoner is crazy. Put him underground.'

	The soldiers took Dantes' arms. He went quietly. They walked down fifteen steps. Then the soldiers opened the door of a room, and threw Dantes inside.

	The door closed, and Dantes walked around. He held his hands out until he touched the wall. Then he sat down in a comer. It was very dark and he could see nothing.

	'The guard is right,' he thought. 'This place will make me completely crazy.'



	Chapter six

	Underground

	Time passed. The chief officer of prisons visited the prisoners' rooms. 'Is the food good?' he asked the prisoners. 'Do you want anything?'

	'The food is very bad, and we want to be free,' they all replied.

	The officer laughed and turned to the governor. 'Why do we come here? We always hear the same thing. "The food is bad. I have done nothing wrong. I want to be free." Are there any other prisoners?'

	'Yes, there are the crazy prisoners. We keep them underground. They are a danger to other people.'

	'Let's visit them. I must see them all.'

	Two soldiers took the officer down the steps. The air smelled bad. The darkness was full of the smell of death.

	'Oh!' cried the officer. 'Who can live here?'

	'Very bad men. We must watch them very carefully.'

	This was the officer's first visit.

	'Prisoner number 34. Let's visit this one first,' he said.

	Dantes was sitting in the corner of his room. He looked up and saw the stranger with two soldiers.

	'This is an important officer,' he thought. He jumped up to meet him, but the soldiers pushed him back.

	'The officer thinks that I am crazy,' Dantes thought. He looked at the officer. He tried to make his voice quiet and calm. 'I only want to know what is going to happen to me. Why am I here? Give me your permission to see a judge.'

	'Perhaps,' said the chief officer. Then, turning to the governor, he said, 'Show me your books. What is this man's crime?'

	'I know that you can't free me,' said Dantes. 'But tell me, please, that there is hope.'

	'I can't tell you that. I can only promise to ask about the matter. Who gave orders for you to come to the prison?'

	'Mr Villefort.'

	'Does he have a reason to be your enemy?'

	'No. He was very kind to me,' Dantes said.

	'Then I can believe what he writes about you in the prison's book?'

	'Yes.'

	The officer left the room and closed the door. But he left something in the room - hope.

	The officer kept his promise to Dantes. He looked in the prison book and found:



	EDMOND DANTES: A dangerous man. He helped

	Napoleon return from Elba. Watch him carefully.



	'I can't help this prisoner,' the chief officer thought. He wrote in the book:

	Do nothing.



	Chapter seven

	Number 27

	Days and weeks passed. Dantes began to think that the officer's visit was only a dream.

	Suddenly, one evening, at about nine o'clock, Edmond heard a sound in the wall next to his bed. He listened. 'Perhaps this is only a dream, too,' he thought. But he heard the sound again. He heard something fall - and then silence.

	Some hours later, he heard the noise again, nearer and more clearly. Edmond listened. 'I know what that sound is,' he thought. 'A prisoner is trying to escape.'

	Edmond wanted to help. He moved his bed, then he looked round the room for a sharp tool. The only things in the room were a bed, a chair, a table, and a water pot. 'I will break the water pot and use one of the sharp pieces,' he thought.

	He threw the pot on the floor, and it broke into pieces. He hid two or three pointed bits in his bed.

	The next morning, the guard came into the room.

	'The water pot fell from my hands when I was drinking,' Dantes said. The man was angry with him for his carelessness, but he brought another pot. He did not take away the broken pieces of the old one.

	Dantes started to work. The stone wall was old and soft, and it broke into small pieces easily. At last he pulled a stone out of the wall. It left a hole half a metre wide. He carefully carried all the small pieces of stone into the comers of the room, and covered them with earth. He put back the big stone, and placed his bed in front of the hole.

	Later, the guard came with his evening meal. When the man left the room, Dantes started to work again. He worked all night, making a deep hole in the wall. Then he stopped.

