	'At night? Do you have cat's eyes? Can you see in the dark?'

	'No, of course not. But God has given man a mind. With it, we can make what we need. I made a lamp for myself. I get the oil from my food, and it burns very well.'

	They sat and talked. Faria's words were clever and wise. Sometimes Dantes could not understand them.

	'You are very wise. Will you teach me ?' Dantes asked. 'I don't want you to get tired of me. A clever person doesn't want to talk to a person who knows nothing. Teach me, and then the hours will pass more quickly for you.'

	Dantes learned new ideas from Faria very quickly and easily. He learned about the history of the world, and the English language, and many other things.

	***

	Time passed. Dantes was much happier, but Faria's health was not good. One day, Faria was in Edmond's room. Edmond was working on the secret path between their rooms. Suddenly, Edmond heard Faria cry out in pain. He hurried to him, and found him in the middle of the room. His face was as white as death.

	'What is the matter?' cried Dantes.

	'Quick!' replied Faria. 'Listen to me.'

	Dantes looked at Faria's face and was afraid. Faria's eyes were dark, and there were deep blue circles round them. His skin was very pale.

	'Listen,' said Faria. 'I have a terrible illness. I was ill before I came to the prison. Help me back to my room. Take out one of the feet which hold up my bed. There is a small bottle of red liquid in the hole.'

	Dantes acted quickly. He pulled the old man down into the underground path, and took him back to his room. Then he helped Faria on to the bed.

	'Thank you,' the poor man said. He was very cold now. 'Now I must tell you about this illness. When it reaches its worst point - and not before - I pour a little of the liquid into my mouth.'

	He stopped talking. The frightening greyness of death passed over his face. Dantes waited. Then he thought, 'My friend is nearly dead.' He took Faria's knife, broke open the bottle and poured a little of the liquid into Faria's mouth. Then he waited again. 'Will my friend die?' he cried.

	One hour passed, and there was no change. Then at last a little colour came into Faria's face. The wide-open eyes showed some life. Faria could not speak, but he pointed to the door. Dantes listened, and heard the steps of the guard. 'He mustn't find me here!' he thought.

	The young man ran to the opening of the underground path and hurried to his room. Just after he reached it, the guard came in with food. He saw his prisoner sitting, as usual, on the side of his bed.

	After the guard left, Dantes hurried back to Faria's room. He lifted up the stone, and was soon next to the sick man's bed. Faria was a little better, but he was still very weak.

	'Don't lose hope,' said Dantes. 'You will soon be strong again.' He sat down on the bed next to Faria and held the old man's cold hands.

	'No,' said Faria. 'My first illness lasted for only half an hour. When it ended, I got up from my bed without help. Now I can't move my right arm or leg, and there is a pain in my head. Next time, the illness will kill me.'



	Chapter nine

	The Story of the Treasure

	The next morning, Dantes returned to Faria's room. Faria looked a little better. He showed Dantes a small piece of paper. Half of it was burnt away.

	Edmond said, 'I can't see anything except broken lines and words.'

	'I know what the words mean,' said Faria. 'But first I will tell you the story of this paper. I was the friend and helper of Prince Spada, the last of the princes of that name. I was very happy with him. A long time ago, his family was very rich - people often say, "as rich as a Spada" - but my friend, Prince Spada, had very little money. He told me about another Spada; this man lived - and died - at the time of Cesare Borgia.

	'Cesare Borgia needed money for his wars, but the country was very poor. Finally he thought of a plan. He asked two famous rich men, Rospigliosi and Spada, to dinner. Rospigliosi was very pleased, but Spada was a wise man. "Cesare Borgia wants my money," he thought. "He will kill me." He wrote a note, then he went to the dinner. There was death in the glass of wine in front of him. "If I don't drink the wine, Borgia will kill me in another way," he thought. So Spada drank - and died.

	'Cesare Borgia took all the dead man's papers, and the last letter that Spada wrote before the dinner. This said:



	'I give everything to my brother's child- all my money and all my books. Tell him to keep the prayer book with the gold comers carefully. It will help him to remember his uncle.'



	'Cesare looked everywhere. There were some gold cups and a little money - very little - and he took those. But he could not find the treasure of the Spadas.

	'Years passed. The famous prayer book stayed in the family, and my friend, the Prince, now owned it. Like many people before me, I looked through all the family papers - through rooms full of papers. Where was the treasure of the Spadas? I found nothing. I read the history of the Borgia family. Cesare Borgia took all the Rospigliosis' money - true - but I found no information about the Spada treasure. I was sure that the treasure was still hidden somewhere.

	'My friend died and left everything to me. He asked me to write a history of the Spada family.'

	'In 1807, a month before I became a prisoner, I was reading some papers. I fell asleep. It was evening when I woke up. The only light was from the fire. I felt for a piece of paper. I wanted to get a light for the lamp from the fire. I didn't want to burn any important papers, but I remembered a piece of plain white paper in the prayer book. I took it and put a corner in the fire.'

	'The fire began to burn the paper. Suddenly, I saw yellow writing! I quickly put out the fire, and looked at the paper. There were words on it. You could only read them when the paper was hot. I burnt a lot of the paper, but the last piece is in your hands.'

	Dantes looked again at the yellow writing.

	'And now,' said Faria, 'look at this.' He gave Dantes a second piece of paper with broken lines of writing on it. 'Put the two pieces together.'

	'Yes,' Dantes said. 'I understand. But the writing on the second piece is different.'

	'It is my writing,' said Faria. 'I thought about it and completed the old paper. When I understood the words, I left immediately. But the government was afraid of me. When I went on board the ship, soldiers took me prisoner.'

	Faria looked at Dantes. 'And now, my dear man,' he said, 'you know as much as I do. If we ever escape together, half this treasure is yours. If I die here, all of the treasure is yours. You are my son. You were born to me in this prison. God sent you to help a sad old prisoner.'

	'Thank you,' said the young man to Faria. 'But we will never have the treasure, because we won't leave this prison. My real treasure is your teaching and your wise words.'



	Chapter ten

	The Death of Faria

	The days passed. Faria talked about his treasure, and he thought about ways of escape for his young friend.

	'I am afraid that I will lose the letter,' he said to Dantes.' Leam it - every word.' Then he burnt the paper.

	Faria could not use his arm and leg, but his words and thoughts were clear. He continued to teach Dantes history and English and other subjects. He also taught him to make things - a useful skill for a prisoner. They were always busy. Dantes worked hard; he wanted to forget the past.

	***

	One night, Edmond woke up suddenly. He heard a weak voice call his name through the darkness. He moved his bed, took out the stone, and hurried along the underground path. The other end of it was open. It was dark, but he saw the old, white-faced man holding on to the end of his bed in great pain.

	'Ah, my dear friend,' said Faria. 'You understand, don't you? You know that the time has come.'

