	'Don't say that!' cried Dantes. 'I have saved you once. I will save you again.'

	He quickly lifted up the foot of the bed and took out the little bottle. There was still some red liquid in it. 'Look,' he cried. 'There is still some in here. Tell me what to do.'

	'There is no hope,' Faria replied. 'But you can try to save my life. Do the same thing, but don't wait too long. If I don't get better, pour the rest into my mouth. Now put me on my bed.'

	Edmond took the old man in his arms and put him on the bed.

	'Dear friend,' said Faria, 'you are good to me. You bring me great happiness. If you escape, go to Monte Cristo. Take the treasure and enjoy it. God go with you!'

	Dantes waited, holding the bottle of liquid in his hand. When it seemed to be the right time, he poured a little of the liquid into Faria's mouth. Then he waited. He waited for ten minutes, half an hour. Then he put the bottle to Faria's mouth and poured in the rest of the liquid.

	Faria moved. His eyes opened. He gave a little cry. Then silence. Edmond sat with his hand on his friend's heart. The heart became weaker and weaker. And then the old man's body slowly went cold.

	Dantes went down into the underground path and put back the stones behind him. He was lucky. A few minutes later, the guard arrived. He went first to Dantes' room. Then he went on to Faria's room with his breakfast and some clothes.

	'What is happening in my friend's room?' Dantes thought. 'I must know.' He went down the underground path and heard the guard's cries.

	Other guards came. 'Finally,' one of them said, 'the old man has gone to look for his treasure. I hope that he has a good journey!'

	'And now we can prepare him for his grave,' another man said. 'Put him in a simple bag of plain cloth. That is enough for a grave at the Chateau d'If!'

	Then there was silence.

	'Perhaps they have gone away,' Edmond thought. 'But I am not sure, so I can't go inside.'

	After an hour he heard a noise. It was the governor, and there was someone with him.

	'Yes,' said an unknown voice, 'Faria is dead.'

	'I am sure that he is,' the governor said. 'But by the rules of the prison, we must check.'

	Dantes heard more footsteps. People went in and out of the room. Then he heard someone pull a large piece of cloth along the floor. There was another sound from the bed when somebody put a heavy weight on it.

	'In the evening,' said the governor. 'At about ten or eleven.'

	'Shall we stay with the body?'

	'No. That isn't necessary. Lock the door.'

	The steps went away and the voices disappeared. Someone locked the door. Then there was silence, the deepest of all silences - the silence of death.

	Dantes lifted the stone. He looked carefully round the room. There was nobody there. He went in.



	Chapter eleven

	The Grave of the Chateau d'If

	On the bed Dantes saw a long bag of dirty cloth. The body of his friend Faria lay inside it. 'Alone! I am alone again,' Dantes thought. And then he stopped. He looked at the bag and a strange thought came to him. 'Only dead people leave this prison. I can take the place of the dead!'

	There was no time to think about it. Dantes opened the bag with Faria's knife. He took the body from the bag and carried it along the underground path to his own room. He laid the body on his bed and pulled the bedclothes over its head. Then he kissed the cold face and turned it to the wall.

	'The guard will think that I am asleep,' Dantes said to himself.

	He returned to Faria's room, took off his clothes and hid them. Then he got inside the bag, and lay exactly like the dead body. 'I have made my plan,' he thought. 'Will the men discover me when they carry the bag outside? Will they find a living man, not a dead body? If that happens, I will cut open the bag from top to bottom with the knife. Then I will escape. If they try to catch me, I will use the knife.

	'Perhaps they will put me in the grave, and cover me with earth. It will be night. I only hope that the grave is not too deep.'

	Another thought came to him. 'When the guard brings my evening meal at seven o'clock, will he notice Faria's body in my bed? But no, I am often in bed when the man comes. He just puts the food on the table and goes away again in silence. If he speaks to me this time, what will happen then? When he gets no answer, will he go to the bed?'

	Dantes waited for the cries of the guard. But the hours passed, and the prison was quiet. Finally, Edmond heard footsteps outside. He must be brave now, braver than ever before. The footsteps stopped outside the door.

	'There are two of them,' Dantes decided. He heard them put down some wood. 'They are going to carry the body on that,' he thought.

	The door opened. Through the cloth of the bag, he saw two shadows come to the ends of his bed. Another man stood at the door with the lamp.

	'He was a thin old man, but he is heavy.' One man was lifting up his head. The other man lifted his feet.

	'Have you tied it on?' the first speaker asked.

	'Not yet - we don't want to carry unnecessary weight!' the other man replied. 'I can do that when we get there.'

	"'Tied it on." Tied what on?' thought Dantes.

	The men put the body on the piece of wood. Then they moved up the steps.

	Suddenly, Dantes felt the cold, fresh night air. The men walked about twenty metres, then stopped and put the body down. One of them went away. Dantes heard the sound of his shoes on the stone. 'Where am I?' he asked himself.

	'Here it is. I have found it.'

	Edmond heard the man put a heavy weight on to the ground next to him. Then he tied the weight round Dantes feet.

	'Is that tied carefully?' asked the other man.

	'Yes. It won't come off,' was the answer.

	The men lifted Dantes up again, and they began to walk. Now Dantes heard the sound of waves against the rocks.

	'We are finally here,' said one of the men.

	'Don't stop yet,' said the other man. 'You know very well that the last one fell on the rocks. Don't you remember that the governor was angry with us?'

	They went five or six more steps, then they lifted Dantes by his head and by his feet.

	'One!' said the men. 'Two! Three - and away!'

	They threw Dantes into the air. He was falling, falling. A heavy weight pulled him quickly down. Finally, with a great noise, he fell into the cold water. When he hit the water, he gave a cry. Then the water closed over him.

