
      “No, I confess that I see no connection.”

      “And yet, my dear Watson, there is so very close a connection
      that the one is extracted out of the other. ‘You,’ ‘your,’
      ‘your,’ ‘life,’ ‘reason,’ ‘value,’ ‘keep away,’ ‘from the.’ Don’t
      you see now whence these words have been taken?”

      “By thunder, you’re right! Well, if that isn’t smart!” cried Sir
      Henry.

      “If any possible doubt remained it is settled by the fact that
      ‘keep away’ and ‘from the’ are cut out in one piece.”

      “Well, now—so it is!”

      “Really, Mr. Holmes, this exceeds anything which I could have
      imagined,” said Dr. Mortimer, gazing at my friend in amazement.
      “I could understand anyone saying that the words were from a
      newspaper; but that you should name which, and add that it came
      from the leading article, is really one of the most remarkable
      things which I have ever known. How did you do it?”

      “I presume, Doctor, that you could tell the skull of a negro from
      that of an Esquimau?”

      “Most certainly.”

      “But how?”

      “Because that is my special hobby. The differences are obvious.
      The supra-orbital crest, the facial angle, the maxillary curve,
      the—”

      “But this is my special hobby, and the differences are equally
      obvious. There is as much difference to my eyes between the
      leaded bourgeois type of a _Times_ article and the slovenly print
      of an evening half-penny paper as there could be between your
      negro and your Esquimau. The detection of types is one of the
      most elementary branches of knowledge to the special expert in
      crime, though I confess that once when I was very young I
      confused the _Leeds Mercury_ with the _Western Morning News_. But
      a _Times_ leader is entirely distinctive, and these words could
      have been taken from nothing else. As it was done yesterday the
      strong probability was that we should find the words in
      yesterday’s issue.”

      “So far as I can follow you, then, Mr. Holmes,” said Sir Henry
      Baskerville, “someone cut out this message with a scissors—”

      “Nail-scissors,” said Holmes. “You can see that it was a very
      short-bladed scissors, since the cutter had to take two snips
      over ‘keep away.’”

      “That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message with a pair of
      short-bladed scissors, pasted it with paste—”

      “Gum,” said Holmes.

      “With gum on to the paper. But I want to know why the word ‘moor’
      should have been written?”

      “Because he could not find it in print. The other words were all
      simple and might be found in any issue, but ‘moor’ would be less
      common.”

      “Why, of course, that would explain it. Have you read anything
      else in this message, Mr. Holmes?”

      “There are one or two indications, and yet the utmost pains have
      been taken to remove all clues. The address, you observe is
      printed in rough characters. But the _Times_ is a paper which is
      seldom found in any hands but those of the highly educated. We
      may take it, therefore, that the letter was composed by an
      educated man who wished to pose as an uneducated one, and his
      effort to conceal his own writing suggests that that writing
      might be known, or come to be known, by you. Again, you will
      observe that the words are not gummed on in an accurate line, but
      that some are much higher than others. ‘Life,’ for example is
      quite out of its proper place. That may point to carelessness or
      it may point to agitation and hurry upon the part of the cutter.
      On the whole I incline to the latter view, since the matter was
      evidently important, and it is unlikely that the composer of such
      a letter would be careless. If he were in a hurry it opens up the
      interesting question why he should be in a hurry, since any
      letter posted up to early morning would reach Sir Henry before he
      would leave his hotel. Did the composer fear an interruption—and
      from whom?”

      “We are coming now rather into the region of guesswork,” said Dr.
      Mortimer.

      “Say, rather, into the region where we balance probabilities and
      choose the most likely. It is the scientific use of the
      imagination, but we have always some material basis on which to
      start our speculation. Now, you would call it a guess, no doubt,
      but I am almost certain that this address has been written in a
      hotel.”

      “How in the world can you say that?”
