
      “If you examine it carefully you will see that both the pen and
      the ink have given the writer trouble. The pen has spluttered
      twice in a single word and has run dry three times in a short
      address, showing that there was very little ink in the bottle.
      Now, a private pen or ink-bottle is seldom allowed to be in such
      a state, and the combination of the two must be quite rare. But
      you know the hotel ink and the hotel pen, where it is rare to get
      anything else. Yes, I have very little hesitation in saying that
      could we examine the waste-paper baskets of the hotels around
      Charing Cross until we found the remains of the mutilated _Times_
      leader we could lay our hands straight upon the person who sent
      this singular message. Halloa! Halloa! What’s this?”

      He was carefully examining the foolscap, upon which the words
      were pasted, holding it only an inch or two from his eyes.

      “Well?”

      “Nothing,” said he, throwing it down. “It is a blank half-sheet
      of paper, without even a water-mark upon it. I think we have
      drawn as much as we can from this curious letter; and now, Sir
      Henry, has anything else of interest happened to you since you
      have been in London?”

      “Why, no, Mr. Holmes. I think not.”

      “You have not observed anyone follow or watch you?”

      “I seem to have walked right into the thick of a dime novel,”
      said our visitor. “Why in thunder should anyone follow or watch
      me?”

      “We are coming to that. You have nothing else to report to us
      before we go into this matter?”

      “Well, it depends upon what you think worth reporting.”

      “I think anything out of the ordinary routine of life well worth
      reporting.”

      Sir Henry smiled. “I don’t know much of British life yet, for I
      have spent nearly all my time in the States and in Canada. But I
      hope that to lose one of your boots is not part of the ordinary
      routine of life over here.”

      “You have lost one of your boots?”

      “My dear sir,” cried Dr. Mortimer, “it is only mislaid. You will
      find it when you return to the hotel. What is the use of
      troubling Mr. Holmes with trifles of this kind?”

      “Well, he asked me for anything outside the ordinary routine.”

      “Exactly,” said Holmes, “however foolish the incident may seem.
      You have lost one of your boots, you say?”

      “Well, mislaid it, anyhow. I put them both outside my door last
      night, and there was only one in the morning. I could get no
      sense out of the chap who cleans them. The worst of it is that I
      only bought the pair last night in the Strand, and I have never
      had them on.”

      “If you have never worn them, why did you put them out to be
      cleaned?”

      “They were tan boots and had never been varnished. That was why I
      put them out.”

      “Then I understand that on your arrival in London yesterday you
      went out at once and bought a pair of boots?”

      “I did a good deal of shopping. Dr. Mortimer here went round with
      me. You see, if I am to be squire down there I must dress the
      part, and it may be that I have got a little careless in my ways
      out West. Among other things I bought these brown boots—gave six
      dollars for them—and had one stolen before ever I had them on my
      feet.”

      “It seems a singularly useless thing to steal,” said Sherlock
      Holmes. “I confess that I share Dr. Mortimer’s belief that it
      will not be long before the missing boot is found.”

      “And, now, gentlemen,” said the baronet with decision, “it seems
      to me that I have spoken quite enough about the little that I
      know. It is time that you kept your promise and gave me a full
      account of what we are all driving at.”

      “Your request is a very reasonable one,” Holmes answered. “Dr.
      Mortimer, I think you could not do better than to tell your story
      as you told it to us.”

      Thus encouraged, our scientific friend drew his papers from his
      pocket and presented the whole case as he had done upon the
      morning before. Sir Henry Baskerville listened with the deepest
      attention and with an occasional exclamation of surprise.

      “Well, I seem to have come into an inheritance with a vengeance,”
      said he when the long narrative was finished. “Of course, I’ve
      heard of the hound ever since I was in the nursery. It’s the pet
