
      “There now!” said Holmes bitterly as he emerged panting and white
      with vexation from the tide of vehicles. “Was ever such bad luck
      and such bad management, too? Watson, Watson, if you are an
      honest man you will record this also and set it against my
      successes!”

      “Who was the man?”

      “I have not an idea.”

      “A spy?”

      “Well, it was evident from what we have heard that Baskerville
      has been very closely shadowed by someone since he has been in
      town. How else could it be known so quickly that it was the
      Northumberland Hotel which he had chosen? If they had followed
      him the first day I argued that they would follow him also the
      second. You may have observed that I twice strolled over to the
      window while Dr. Mortimer was reading his legend.”

      “Yes, I remember.”

      “I was looking out for loiterers in the street, but I saw none.
      We are dealing with a clever man, Watson. This matter cuts very
      deep, and though I have not finally made up my mind whether it is
      a benevolent or a malevolent agency which is in touch with us, I
      am conscious always of power and design. When our friends left I
      at once followed them in the hopes of marking down their
      invisible attendant. So wily was he that he had not trusted
      himself upon foot, but he had availed himself of a cab so that he
      could loiter behind or dash past them and so escape their notice.
      His method had the additional advantage that if they were to take
      a cab he was all ready to follow them. It has, however, one
      obvious disadvantage.”

      “It puts him in the power of the cabman.”

      “Exactly.”

      “What a pity we did not get the number!”

      “My dear Watson, clumsy as I have been, you surely do not
      seriously imagine that I neglected to get the number? No. 2704 is
      our man. But that is no use to us for the moment.”

      “I fail to see how you could have done more.”

      “On observing the cab I should have instantly turned and walked
      in the other direction. I should then at my leisure have hired a
      second cab and followed the first at a respectful distance, or,
      better still, have driven to the Northumberland Hotel and waited
      there. When our unknown had followed Baskerville home we should
      have had the opportunity of playing his own game upon himself and
      seeing where he made for. As it is, by an indiscreet eagerness,
      which was taken advantage of with extraordinary quickness and
      energy by our opponent, we have betrayed ourselves and lost our
      man.”

      We had been sauntering slowly down Regent Street during this
      conversation, and Dr. Mortimer, with his companion, had long
      vanished in front of us.

      “There is no object in our following them,” said Holmes. “The
      shadow has departed and will not return. We must see what further
      cards we have in our hands and play them with decision. Could you
      swear to that man’s face within the cab?”

      “I could swear only to the beard.”

      “And so could I—from which I gather that in all probability it
      was a false one. A clever man upon so delicate an errand has no
      use for a beard save to conceal his features. Come in here,
      Watson!”

      He turned into one of the district messenger offices, where he
      was warmly greeted by the manager.

      “Ah, Wilson, I see you have not forgotten the little case in
      which I had the good fortune to help you?”

      “No, sir, indeed I have not. You saved my good name, and perhaps
      my life.”

      “My dear fellow, you exaggerate. I have some recollection,
      Wilson, that you had among your boys a lad named Cartwright, who
      showed some ability during the investigation.”

      “Yes, sir, he is still with us.”

      “Could you ring him up?—thank you! And I should be glad to have
      change of this five-pound note.”

      A lad of fourteen, with a bright, keen face, had obeyed the
      summons of the manager. He stood now gazing with great reverence
      at the famous detective.

      “Let me have the Hotel Directory,” said Holmes. “Thank you! Now,
      Cartwright, there are the names of twenty-three hotels here, all
      in the immediate neighbourhood of Charing Cross. Do you see?”
