      he held an old and dusty boot in one of his hands. So furious was
      he that he was hardly articulate, and when he did speak it was in
      a much broader and more Western dialect than any which we had
      heard from him in the morning.

      “Seems to me they are playing me for a sucker in this hotel,” he
      cried. “They’ll find they’ve started in to monkey with the wrong
      man unless they are careful. By thunder, if that chap can’t find
      my missing boot there will be trouble. I can take a joke with the
      best, Mr. Holmes, but they’ve got a bit over the mark this time.”

      “Still looking for your boot?”

      “Yes, sir, and mean to find it.”

      “But, surely, you said that it was a new brown boot?”

      “So it was, sir. And now it’s an old black one.”

      “What! you don’t mean to say—?”

      “That’s just what I do mean to say. I only had three pairs in the
      world—the new brown, the old black, and the patent leathers,
      which I am wearing. Last night they took one of my brown ones,
      and today they have sneaked one of the black. Well, have you got
      it? Speak out, man, and don’t stand staring!”

      An agitated German waiter had appeared upon the scene.

      “No, sir; I have made inquiry all over the hotel, but I can hear
      no word of it.”

      “Well, either that boot comes back before sundown or I’ll see the
      manager and tell him that I go right straight out of this hotel.”

      “It shall be found, sir—I promise you that if you will have a
      little patience it will be found.”

      “Mind it is, for it’s the last thing of mine that I’ll lose in
      this den of thieves. Well, well, Mr. Holmes, you’ll excuse my
      troubling you about such a trifle—”

      “I think it’s well worth troubling about.”

      “Why, you look very serious over it.”

      “How do you explain it?”

      “I just don’t attempt to explain it. It seems the very maddest,
      queerest thing that ever happened to me.”

      “The queerest perhaps—” said Holmes thoughtfully.

      “What do you make of it yourself?”

      “Well, I don’t profess to understand it yet. This case of yours
      is very complex, Sir Henry. When taken in conjunction with your
      uncle’s death I am not sure that of all the five hundred cases of
      capital importance which I have handled there is one which cuts
      so deep. But we hold several threads in our hands, and the odds
      are that one or other of them guides us to the truth. We may
      waste time in following the wrong one, but sooner or later we
      must come upon the right.”

      We had a pleasant luncheon in which little was said of the
      business which had brought us together. It was in the private
      sitting-room to which we afterwards repaired that Holmes asked
      Baskerville what were his intentions.

      “To go to Baskerville Hall.”

      “And when?”

      “At the end of the week.”

      “On the whole,” said Holmes, “I think that your decision is a
      wise one. I have ample evidence that you are being dogged in
      London, and amid the millions of this great city it is difficult
      to discover who these people are or what their object can be. If
      their intentions are evil they might do you a mischief, and we
      should be powerless to prevent it. You did not know, Dr.
      Mortimer, that you were followed this morning from my house?”

      Dr. Mortimer started violently. “Followed! By whom?”

      “That, unfortunately, is what I cannot tell you. Have you among
      your neighbours or acquaintances on Dartmoor any man with a
      black, full beard?”

      “No—or, let me see—why, yes. Barrymore, Sir Charles’s butler, is
      a man with a full, black beard.”

      “Ha! Where is Barrymore?”

      “He is in charge of the Hall.”

      “We had best ascertain if he is really there, or if by any
      possibility he might be in London.”

      “How can you do that?”
