      miles away from yours. With all the goodwill in the world he may
      be unable to help you. No, Sir Henry, you must take with you
      someone, a trusty man, who will be always by your side.”

      “Is it possible that you could come yourself, Mr. Holmes?”

      “If matters came to a crisis I should endeavour to be present in
      person; but you can understand that, with my extensive consulting
      practice and with the constant appeals which reach me from many
      quarters, it is impossible for me to be absent from London for an
      indefinite time. At the present instant one of the most revered
      names in England is being besmirched by a blackmailer, and only I
      can stop a disastrous scandal. You will see how impossible it is
      for me to go to Dartmoor.”

      “Whom would you recommend, then?”

      Holmes laid his hand upon my arm. “If my friend would undertake
      it there is no man who is better worth having at your side when
      you are in a tight place. No one can say so more confidently than
      I.”

      The proposition took me completely by surprise, but before I had
      time to answer, Baskerville seized me by the hand and wrung it
      heartily.

      “Well, now, that is real kind of you, Dr. Watson,” said he. “You
      see how it is with me, and you know just as much about the matter
      as I do. If you will come down to Baskerville Hall and see me
      through I’ll never forget it.”

      The promise of adventure had always a fascination for me, and I
      was complimented by the words of Holmes and by the eagerness with
      which the baronet hailed me as a companion.

      “I will come, with pleasure,” said I. “I do not know how I could
      employ my time better.”

      “And you will report very carefully to me,” said Holmes. “When a
      crisis comes, as it will do, I will direct how you shall act. I
      suppose that by Saturday all might be ready?”

      “Would that suit Dr. Watson?”

      “Perfectly.”

      “Then on Saturday, unless you hear to the contrary, we shall meet
      at the ten-thirty train from Paddington.”

      We had risen to depart when Baskerville gave a cry of triumph,
      and diving into one of the corners of the room he drew a brown
      boot from under a cabinet.

      “My missing boot!” he cried.

      “May all our difficulties vanish as easily!” said Sherlock
      Holmes.

      “But it is a very singular thing,” Dr. Mortimer remarked. “I
      searched this room carefully before lunch.”

      “And so did I,” said Baskerville. “Every inch of it.”

      “There was certainly no boot in it then.”

      “In that case the waiter must have placed it there while we were
      lunching.”

      The German was sent for but professed to know nothing of the
      matter, nor could any inquiry clear it up. Another item had been
      added to that constant and apparently purposeless series of small
      mysteries which had succeeded each other so rapidly. Setting
      aside the whole grim story of Sir Charles’s death, we had a line
      of inexplicable incidents all within the limits of two days,
      which included the receipt of the printed letter, the
      black-bearded spy in the hansom, the loss of the new brown boot,
      the loss of the old black boot, and now the return of the new
      brown boot. Holmes sat in silence in the cab as we drove back to
      Baker Street, and I knew from his drawn brows and keen face that
      his mind, like my own, was busy in endeavouring to frame some
      scheme into which all these strange and apparently disconnected
      episodes could be fitted. All afternoon and late into the evening
      he sat lost in tobacco and thought.

      Just before dinner two telegrams were handed in. The first ran:

      Have just heard that Barrymore is at the Hall. BASKERVILLE.

      The second:

      Visited twenty-three hotels as directed, but sorry to report
      unable to trace cut sheet of _Times_. CARTWRIGHT.

      “There go two of my threads, Watson. There is nothing more
      stimulating than a case where everything goes against you. We
      must cast round for another scent.”

      “We have still the cabman who drove the spy.”

      “Exactly. I have wired to get his name and address from the
