
      “And how would you describe Mr. Sherlock Holmes?”

      The cabman scratched his head. “Well, he wasn’t altogether such
      an easy gentleman to describe. I’d put him at forty years of age,
      and he was of a middle height, two or three inches shorter than
      you, sir. He was dressed like a toff, and he had a black beard,
      cut square at the end, and a pale face. I don’t know as I could
      say more than that.”

      “Colour of his eyes?”

      “No, I can’t say that.”

      “Nothing more that you can remember?”

      “No, sir; nothing.”

      “Well, then, here is your half-sovereign. There’s another one
      waiting for you if you can bring any more information.
      Good-night!”

      “Good-night, sir, and thank you!”

      John Clayton departed chuckling, and Holmes turned to me with a
      shrug of his shoulders and a rueful smile.

      “Snap goes our third thread, and we end where we began,” said he.
      “The cunning rascal! He knew our number, knew that Sir Henry
      Baskerville had consulted me, spotted who I was in Regent Street,
      conjectured that I had got the number of the cab and would lay my
      hands on the driver, and so sent back this audacious message. I
      tell you, Watson, this time we have got a foeman who is worthy of
      our steel. I’ve been checkmated in London. I can only wish you
      better luck in Devonshire. But I’m not easy in my mind about it.”

      “About what?”

      “About sending you. It’s an ugly business, Watson, an ugly
      dangerous business, and the more I see of it the less I like it.
      Yes, my dear fellow, you may laugh, but I give you my word that I
      shall be very glad to have you back safe and sound in Baker
      Street once more.”



Chapter 6.

Baskerville Hall

      Sir Henry Baskerville and Dr. Mortimer were ready upon the
      appointed day, and we started as arranged for Devonshire. Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes drove with me to the station and gave me his last
      parting injunctions and advice.

      “I will not bias your mind by suggesting theories or suspicions,
      Watson,” said he; “I wish you simply to report facts in the
      fullest possible manner to me, and you can leave me to do the
      theorizing.”

      “What sort of facts?” I asked.

      “Anything which may seem to have a bearing however indirect upon
      the case, and especially the relations between young Baskerville
      and his neighbours or any fresh particulars concerning the death
      of Sir Charles. I have made some inquiries myself in the last few
      days, but the results have, I fear, been negative. One thing only
      appears to be certain, and that is that Mr. James Desmond, who is
      the next heir, is an elderly gentleman of a very amiable
      disposition, so that this persecution does not arise from him. I
      really think that we may eliminate him entirely from our
      calculations. There remain the people who will actually surround
      Sir Henry Baskerville upon the moor.”

      “Would it not be well in the first place to get rid of this
      Barrymore couple?”

      “By no means. You could not make a greater mistake. If they are
      innocent it would be a cruel injustice, and if they are guilty we
      should be giving up all chance of bringing it home to them. No,
      no, we will preserve them upon our list of suspects. Then there
      is a groom at the Hall, if I remember right. There are two
      moorland farmers. There is our friend Dr. Mortimer, whom I
      believe to be entirely honest, and there is his wife, of whom we
      know nothing. There is this naturalist, Stapleton, and there is
      his sister, who is said to be a young lady of attractions. There
      is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who is also an unknown factor,
      and there are one or two other neighbours. These are the folk who
      must be your very special study.”

      “I will do my best.”

      “You have arms, I suppose?”

      “Yes, I thought it as well to take them.”

      “Most certainly. Keep your revolver near you night and day, and
      never relax your precautions.”

      Our friends had already secured a first-class carriage and were
