      the means to do so. And now, sir, perhaps I had best show you to
      your rooms.”

      A square balustraded gallery ran round the top of the old hall,
      approached by a double stair. From this central point two long
      corridors extended the whole length of the building, from which
      all the bedrooms opened. My own was in the same wing as
      Baskerville’s and almost next door to it. These rooms appeared to
      be much more modern than the central part of the house, and the
      bright paper and numerous candles did something to remove the
      sombre impression which our arrival had left upon my mind.

      But the dining-room which opened out of the hall was a place of
      shadow and gloom. It was a long chamber with a step separating
      the dais where the family sat from the lower portion reserved for
      their dependents. At one end a minstrel’s gallery overlooked it.
      Black beams shot across above our heads, with a smoke-darkened
      ceiling beyond them. With rows of flaring torches to light it up,
      and the colour and rude hilarity of an old-time banquet, it might
      have softened; but now, when two black-clothed gentlemen sat in
      the little circle of light thrown by a shaded lamp, one’s voice
      became hushed and one’s spirit subdued. A dim line of ancestors,
      in every variety of dress, from the Elizabethan knight to the
      buck of the Regency, stared down upon us and daunted us by their
      silent company. We talked little, and I for one was glad when the
      meal was over and we were able to retire into the modern
      billiard-room and smoke a cigarette.

      “My word, it isn’t a very cheerful place,” said Sir Henry. “I
      suppose one can tone down to it, but I feel a bit out of the
      picture at present. I don’t wonder that my uncle got a little
      jumpy if he lived all alone in such a house as this. However, if
      it suits you, we will retire early tonight, and perhaps things
      may seem more cheerful in the morning.”

      I drew aside my curtains before I went to bed and looked out from
      my window. It opened upon the grassy space which lay in front of
      the hall door. Beyond, two copses of trees moaned and swung in a
      rising wind. A half moon broke through the rifts of racing
      clouds. In its cold light I saw beyond the trees a broken fringe
      of rocks, and the long, low curve of the melancholy moor. I
      closed the curtain, feeling that my last impression was in
      keeping with the rest.

      And yet it was not quite the last. I found myself weary and yet
      wakeful, tossing restlessly from side to side, seeking for the
      sleep which would not come. Far away a chiming clock struck out
      the quarters of the hours, but otherwise a deathly silence lay
      upon the old house. And then suddenly, in the very dead of the
      night, there came a sound to my ears, clear, resonant, and
      unmistakable. It was the sob of a woman, the muffled, strangling
      gasp of one who is torn by an uncontrollable sorrow. I sat up in
      bed and listened intently. The noise could not have been far away
      and was certainly in the house. For half an hour I waited with
      every nerve on the alert, but there came no other sound save the
      chiming clock and the rustle of the ivy on the wall.



Chapter 7.

The Stapletons of Merripit House

      The fresh beauty of the following morning did something to efface
      from our minds the grim and grey impression which had been left
      upon both of us by our first experience of Baskerville Hall. As
      Sir Henry and I sat at breakfast the sunlight flooded in through
      the high mullioned windows, throwing watery patches of colour
      from the coats of arms which covered them. The dark panelling
      glowed like bronze in the golden rays, and it was hard to realise
      that this was indeed the chamber which had struck such a gloom
      into our souls upon the evening before.

      “I guess it is ourselves and not the house that we have to
      blame!” said the baronet. “We were tired with our journey and
      chilled by our drive, so we took a grey view of the place. Now we
      are fresh and well, so it is all cheerful once more.”

      “And yet it was not entirely a question of imagination,” I
      answered. “Did you, for example, happen to hear someone, a woman
      I think, sobbing in the night?”

      “That is curious, for I did when I was half asleep fancy that I
      heard something of the sort. I waited quite a time, but there was
      no more of it, so I concluded that it was all a dream.”

      “I heard it distinctly, and I am sure that it was really the sob
      of a woman.”

      “We must ask about this right away.” He rang the bell and asked
      Barrymore whether he could account for our experience. It seemed
      to me that the pallid features of the butler turned a shade paler
      still as he listened to his master’s question.

      “There are only two women in the house, Sir Henry,” he answered.
      “One is the scullery-maid, who sleeps in the other wing. The
      other is my wife, and I can answer for it that the sound could
      not have come from her.”

      And yet he lied as he said it, for it chanced that after
