      we turned together down the path.

      “It is a wonderful place, the moor,” said he, looking round over
      the undulating downs, long green rollers, with crests of jagged
      granite foaming up into fantastic surges. “You never tire of the
      moor. You cannot think the wonderful secrets which it contains.
      It is so vast, and so barren, and so mysterious.”

      “You know it well, then?”

      “I have only been here two years. The residents would call me a
      newcomer. We came shortly after Sir Charles settled. But my
      tastes led me to explore every part of the country round, and I
      should think that there are few men who know it better than I
      do.”

      “Is it hard to know?”

      “Very hard. You see, for example, this great plain to the north
      here with the queer hills breaking out of it. Do you observe
      anything remarkable about that?”

      “It would be a rare place for a gallop.”

      “You would naturally think so and the thought has cost several
      their lives before now. You notice those bright green spots
      scattered thickly over it?”

      “Yes, they seem more fertile than the rest.”

      Stapleton laughed. “That is the great Grimpen Mire,” said he. “A
      false step yonder means death to man or beast. Only yesterday I
      saw one of the moor ponies wander into it. He never came out. I
      saw his head for quite a long time craning out of the bog-hole,
      but it sucked him down at last. Even in dry seasons it is a
      danger to cross it, but after these autumn rains it is an awful
      place. And yet I can find my way to the very heart of it and
      return alive. By George, there is another of those miserable
      ponies!”

      Something brown was rolling and tossing among the green sedges.
      Then a long, agonised, writhing neck shot upward and a dreadful
      cry echoed over the moor. It turned me cold with horror, but my
      companion’s nerves seemed to be stronger than mine.

      “It’s gone!” said he. “The mire has him. Two in two days, and
      many more, perhaps, for they get in the way of going there in the
      dry weather and never know the difference until the mire has them
      in its clutches. It’s a bad place, the great Grimpen Mire.”

      “And you say you can penetrate it?”

      “Yes, there are one or two paths which a very active man can
      take. I have found them out.”

      “But why should you wish to go into so horrible a place?”

      “Well, you see the hills beyond? They are really islands cut off
      on all sides by the impassable mire, which has crawled round them
      in the course of years. That is where the rare plants and the
      butterflies are, if you have the wit to reach them.”

      “I shall try my luck some day.”

      He looked at me with a surprised face. “For God’s sake put such
      an idea out of your mind,” said he. “Your blood would be upon my
      head. I assure you that there would not be the least chance of
      your coming back alive. It is only by remembering certain complex
      landmarks that I am able to do it.”

      “Halloa!” I cried. “What is that?”

      A long, low moan, indescribably sad, swept over the moor. It
      filled the whole air, and yet it was impossible to say whence it
      came. From a dull murmur it swelled into a deep roar, and then
      sank back into a melancholy, throbbing murmur once again.
      Stapleton looked at me with a curious expression in his face.

      “Queer place, the moor!” said he.

      “But what is it?”

      “The peasants say it is the Hound of the Baskervilles calling for
      its prey. I’ve heard it once or twice before, but never quite so
      loud.”

      I looked round, with a chill of fear in my heart, at the huge
      swelling plain, mottled with the green patches of rushes. Nothing
      stirred over the vast expanse save a pair of ravens, which
      croaked loudly from a tor behind us.

      “You are an educated man. You don’t believe such nonsense as
      that?” said I. “What do you think is the cause of so strange a
      sound?”

      “Bogs make queer noises sometimes. It’s the mud settling, or the
      water rising, or something.”

      “No, no, that was a living voice.”

