      of the track. Her face was beautifully flushed with her exertions
      and she held her hand to her side.

      “I have run all the way in order to cut you off, Dr. Watson,”
      said she. “I had not even time to put on my hat. I must not stop,
      or my brother may miss me. I wanted to say to you how sorry I am
      about the stupid mistake I made in thinking that you were Sir
      Henry. Please forget the words I said, which have no application
      whatever to you.”

      “But I can’t forget them, Miss Stapleton,” said I. “I am Sir
      Henry’s friend, and his welfare is a very close concern of mine.
      Tell me why it was that you were so eager that Sir Henry should
      return to London.”

      “A woman’s whim, Dr. Watson. When you know me better you will
      understand that I cannot always give reasons for what I say or
      do.”

      “No, no. I remember the thrill in your voice. I remember the look
      in your eyes. Please, please, be frank with me, Miss Stapleton,
      for ever since I have been here I have been conscious of shadows
      all round me. Life has become like that great Grimpen Mire, with
      little green patches everywhere into which one may sink and with
      no guide to point the track. Tell me then what it was that you
      meant, and I will promise to convey your warning to Sir Henry.”

      An expression of irresolution passed for an instant over her
      face, but her eyes had hardened again when she answered me.

      “You make too much of it, Dr. Watson,” said she. “My brother and
      I were very much shocked by the death of Sir Charles. We knew him
      very intimately, for his favourite walk was over the moor to our
      house. He was deeply impressed with the curse which hung over the
      family, and when this tragedy came I naturally felt that there
      must be some grounds for the fears which he had expressed. I was
      distressed therefore when another member of the family came down
      to live here, and I felt that he should be warned of the danger
      which he will run. That was all which I intended to convey.

      “But what is the danger?”

      “You know the story of the hound?”

      “I do not believe in such nonsense.”

      “But I do. If you have any influence with Sir Henry, take him
      away from a place which has always been fatal to his family. The
      world is wide. Why should he wish to live at the place of
      danger?”

      “Because it _is_ the place of danger. That is Sir Henry’s nature.
      I fear that unless you can give me some more definite information
      than this it would be impossible to get him to move.”

      “I cannot say anything definite, for I do not know anything
      definite.”

      “I would ask you one more question, Miss Stapleton. If you meant
      no more than this when you first spoke to me, why should you not
      wish your brother to overhear what you said? There is nothing to
      which he, or anyone else, could object.”

      “My brother is very anxious to have the Hall inhabited, for he
      thinks it is for the good of the poor folk upon the moor. He
      would be very angry if he knew that I have said anything which
      might induce Sir Henry to go away. But I have done my duty now
      and I will say no more. I must go back, or he will miss me and
      suspect that I have seen you. Good-bye!” She turned and had
      disappeared in a few minutes among the scattered boulders, while
      I, with my soul full of vague fears, pursued my way to
      Baskerville Hall.



Chapter 8.

First Report of Dr. Watson

      From this point onward I will follow the course of events by
      transcribing my own letters to Mr. Sherlock Holmes which lie
      before me on the table. One page is missing, but otherwise they
      are exactly as written and show my feelings and suspicions of the
      moment more accurately than my memory, clear as it is upon these
      tragic events, can possibly do.

      Baskerville Hall, October 13th.

      MY DEAR HOLMES,

      My previous letters and telegrams have kept you pretty well up to
      date as to all that has occurred in this most God-forsaken corner
      of the world. The longer one stays here the more does the spirit
      of the moor sink into one’s soul, its vastness, and also its grim
      charm. When you are once out upon its bosom you have left all
      traces of modern England behind you, but, on the other hand, you
      are conscious everywhere of the homes and the work of the
      prehistoric people. On all sides of you as you walk are the
      houses of these forgotten folk, with their graves and the huge
      monoliths which are supposed to have marked their temples. As you
