      _tête-à-tête_. By the way, your instructions to me never to allow
      Sir Henry to go out alone will become very much more onerous if a
      love affair were to be added to our other difficulties. My
      popularity would soon suffer if I were to carry out your orders
      to the letter.

      The other day—Thursday, to be more exact—Dr. Mortimer lunched
      with us. He has been excavating a barrow at Long Down and has got
      a prehistoric skull which fills him with great joy. Never was
      there such a single-minded enthusiast as he! The Stapletons came
      in afterwards, and the good doctor took us all to the yew alley
      at Sir Henry’s request to show us exactly how everything occurred
      upon that fatal night. It is a long, dismal walk, the yew alley,
      between two high walls of clipped hedge, with a narrow band of
      grass upon either side. At the far end is an old tumble-down
      summer-house. Halfway down is the moor-gate, where the old
      gentleman left his cigar-ash. It is a white wooden gate with a
      latch. Beyond it lies the wide moor. I remembered your theory of
      the affair and tried to picture all that had occurred. As the old
      man stood there he saw something coming across the moor,
      something which terrified him so that he lost his wits and ran
      and ran until he died of sheer horror and exhaustion. There was
      the long, gloomy tunnel down which he fled. And from what? A
      sheep-dog of the moor? Or a spectral hound, black, silent, and
      monstrous? Was there a human agency in the matter? Did the pale,
      watchful Barrymore know more than he cared to say? It was all dim
      and vague, but always there is the dark shadow of crime behind
      it.

      One other neighbour I have met since I wrote last. This is Mr.
      Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who lives some four miles to the south
      of us. He is an elderly man, red-faced, white-haired, and
      choleric. His passion is for the British law, and he has spent a
      large fortune in litigation. He fights for the mere pleasure of
      fighting and is equally ready to take up either side of a
      question, so that it is no wonder that he has found it a costly
      amusement. Sometimes he will shut up a right of way and defy the
      parish to make him open it. At others he will with his own hands
      tear down some other man’s gate and declare that a path has
      existed there from time immemorial, defying the owner to
      prosecute him for trespass. He is learned in old manorial and
      communal rights, and he applies his knowledge sometimes in favour
      of the villagers of Fernworthy and sometimes against them, so
      that he is periodically either carried in triumph down the
      village street or else burned in effigy, according to his latest
      exploit. He is said to have about seven lawsuits upon his hands
      at present, which will probably swallow up the remainder of his
      fortune and so draw his sting and leave him harmless for the
      future. Apart from the law he seems a kindly, good-natured
      person, and I only mention him because you were particular that I
      should send some description of the people who surround us. He is
      curiously employed at present, for, being an amateur astronomer,
      he has an excellent telescope, with which he lies upon the roof
      of his own house and sweeps the moor all day in the hope of
      catching a glimpse of the escaped convict. If he would confine
      his energies to this all would be well, but there are rumours
      that he intends to prosecute Dr. Mortimer for opening a grave
      without the consent of the next of kin because he dug up the
      Neolithic skull in the barrow on Long Down. He helps to keep our
      lives from being monotonous and gives a little comic relief where
      it is badly needed.

      And now, having brought you up to date in the escaped convict,
      the Stapletons, Dr. Mortimer, and Frankland, of Lafter Hall, let
      me end on that which is most important and tell you more about
      the Barrymores, and especially about the surprising development
      of last night.

      First of all about the test telegram, which you sent from London
      in order to make sure that Barrymore was really here. I have
      already explained that the testimony of the postmaster shows that
      the test was worthless and that we have no proof one way or the
      other. I told Sir Henry how the matter stood, and he at once, in
      his downright fashion, had Barrymore up and asked him whether he
      had received the telegram himself. Barrymore said that he had.

      “Did the boy deliver it into your own hands?” asked Sir Henry.

      Barrymore looked surprised, and considered for a little time.

      “No,” said he, “I was in the box-room at the time, and my wife
      brought it up to me.”

      “Did you answer it yourself?”

      “No; I told my wife what to answer and she went down to write
      it.”

      In the evening he recurred to the subject of his own accord.

      “I could not quite understand the object of your questions this
      morning, Sir Henry,” said he. “I trust that they do not mean that
      I have done anything to forfeit your confidence?”

      Sir Henry had to assure him that it was not so and pacify him by
      giving him a considerable part of his old wardrobe, the London
      outfit having now all arrived.

      Mrs. Barrymore is of interest to me. She is a heavy, solid
      person, very limited, intensely respectable, and inclined to be
