      peeped through we found him crouching at the window, candle in
      hand, his white, intent face pressed against the pane, exactly as
      I had seen him two nights before.

      We had arranged no plan of campaign, but the baronet is a man to
      whom the most direct way is always the most natural. He walked
      into the room, and as he did so Barrymore sprang up from the
      window with a sharp hiss of his breath and stood, livid and
      trembling, before us. His dark eyes, glaring out of the white
      mask of his face, were full of horror and astonishment as he
      gazed from Sir Henry to me.

      “What are you doing here, Barrymore?”

      “Nothing, sir.” His agitation was so great that he could hardly
      speak, and the shadows sprang up and down from the shaking of his
      candle. “It was the window, sir. I go round at night to see that
      they are fastened.”

      “On the second floor?”

      “Yes, sir, all the windows.”

      “Look here, Barrymore,” said Sir Henry sternly, “we have made up
      our minds to have the truth out of you, so it will save you
      trouble to tell it sooner rather than later. Come, now! No lies!
      What were you doing at that window?”

      The fellow looked at us in a helpless way, and he wrung his hands
      together like one who is in the last extremity of doubt and
      misery.

      “I was doing no harm, sir. I was holding a candle to the window.”

      “And why were you holding a candle to the window?”

      “Don’t ask me, Sir Henry—don’t ask me! I give you my word, sir,
      that it is not my secret, and that I cannot tell it. If it
      concerned no one but myself I would not try to keep it from you.”

      A sudden idea occurred to me, and I took the candle from the
      trembling hand of the butler.

      “He must have been holding it as a signal,” said I. “Let us see
      if there is any answer.” I held it as he had done, and stared out
      into the darkness of the night. Vaguely I could discern the black
      bank of the trees and the lighter expanse of the moor, for the
      moon was behind the clouds. And then I gave a cry of exultation,
      for a tiny pinpoint of yellow light had suddenly transfixed the
      dark veil, and glowed steadily in the centre of the black square
      framed by the window.

      “There it is!” I cried.

      “No, no, sir, it is nothing—nothing at all!” the butler broke in;
      “I assure you, sir—”

      “Move your light across the window, Watson!” cried the baronet.
      “See, the other moves also! Now, you rascal, do you deny that it
      is a signal? Come, speak up! Who is your confederate out yonder,
      and what is this conspiracy that is going on?”

      The man’s face became openly defiant. “It is my business, and not
      yours. I will not tell.”

      “Then you leave my employment right away.”

      “Very good, sir. If I must I must.”

      “And you go in disgrace. By thunder, you may well be ashamed of
      yourself. Your family has lived with mine for over a hundred
      years under this roof, and here I find you deep in some dark plot
      against me.”

      “No, no, sir; no, not against you!” It was a woman’s voice, and
      Mrs. Barrymore, paler and more horror-struck than her husband,
      was standing at the door. Her bulky figure in a shawl and skirt
      might have been comic were it not for the intensity of feeling
      upon her face.

      “We have to go, Eliza. This is the end of it. You can pack our
      things,” said the butler.

      “Oh, John, John, have I brought you to this? It is my doing, Sir
      Henry—all mine. He has done nothing except for my sake and
      because I asked him.”

      “Speak out, then! What does it mean?”

      “My unhappy brother is starving on the moor. We cannot let him
      perish at our very gates. The light is a signal to him that food
      is ready for him, and his light out yonder is to show the spot to
      which to bring it.”

      “Then your brother is—”

      “The escaped convict, sir—Selden, the criminal.”

      “That’s the truth, sir,” said Barrymore. “I said that it was not
      my secret and that I could not tell it to you. But now you have
