
      “You knew him, did you not?”

      “I have already said that I owe a great deal to his kindness. If
      I am able to support myself it is largely due to the interest
      which he took in my unhappy situation.”

      “Did you correspond with him?”

      The lady looked quickly up with an angry gleam in her hazel eyes.

      “What is the object of these questions?” she asked sharply.

      “The object is to avoid a public scandal. It is better that I
      should ask them here than that the matter should pass outside our
      control.”

      She was silent and her face was still very pale. At last she
      looked up with something reckless and defiant in her manner.

      “Well, I’ll answer,” she said. “What are your questions?”

      “Did you correspond with Sir Charles?”

      “I certainly wrote to him once or twice to acknowledge his
      delicacy and his generosity.”

      “Have you the dates of those letters?”

      “No.”

      “Have you ever met him?”

      “Yes, once or twice, when he came into Coombe Tracey. He was a
      very retiring man, and he preferred to do good by stealth.”

      “But if you saw him so seldom and wrote so seldom, how did he
      know enough about your affairs to be able to help you, as you say
      that he has done?”

      She met my difficulty with the utmost readiness.

      “There were several gentlemen who knew my sad history and united
      to help me. One was Mr. Stapleton, a neighbour and intimate
      friend of Sir Charles’s. He was exceedingly kind, and it was
      through him that Sir Charles learned about my affairs.”

      I knew already that Sir Charles Baskerville had made Stapleton
      his almoner upon several occasions, so the lady’s statement bore
      the impress of truth upon it.

      “Did you ever write to Sir Charles asking him to meet you?” I
      continued.

      Mrs. Lyons flushed with anger again. “Really, sir, this is a very
      extraordinary question.”

      “I am sorry, madam, but I must repeat it.”

      “Then I answer, certainly not.”

      “Not on the very day of Sir Charles’s death?”

      The flush had faded in an instant, and a deathly face was before
      me. Her dry lips could not speak the “No” which I saw rather than
      heard.

      “Surely your memory deceives you,” said I. “I could even quote a
      passage of your letter. It ran ‘Please, please, as you are a
      gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o’clock.’”

      I thought that she had fainted, but she recovered herself by a
      supreme effort.

      “Is there no such thing as a gentleman?” she gasped.

      “You do Sir Charles an injustice. He _did_ burn the letter. But
      sometimes a letter may be legible even when burned. You
      acknowledge now that you wrote it?”

      “Yes, I did write it,” she cried, pouring out her soul in a
      torrent of words. “I did write it. Why should I deny it? I have
      no reason to be ashamed of it. I wished him to help me. I
      believed that if I had an interview I could gain his help, so I
      asked him to meet me.”

      “But why at such an hour?”

      “Because I had only just learned that he was going to London next
      day and might be away for months. There were reasons why I could
      not get there earlier.”

      “But why a rendezvous in the garden instead of a visit to the
      house?”

      “Do you think a woman could go alone at that hour to a bachelor’s
      house?”

      “Well, what happened when you did get there?”

