            the bird escaped.  Then, as it would seem, he became as one
            that hath a devil, for, rushing down the stairs into the
            dining-hall, he sprang upon the great table, flagons and
            trenchers flying before him, and he cried aloud before all
            the company that he would that very night render his body
            and soul to the Powers of Evil if he might but overtake the
            wench.  And while the revellers stood aghast at the fury of
            the man, one more wicked or, it may be, more drunken than
            the rest, cried out that they should put the hounds upon
            her.  Whereat Hugo ran from the house, crying to his grooms
            that they should saddle his mare and unkennel the pack, and
            giving the hounds a kerchief of the maid’s, he swung them
            to the line, and so off full cry in the moonlight over the
            moor.

            “Now, for some space the revellers stood agape, unable to
            understand all that had been done in such haste.  But anon
            their bemused wits awoke to the nature of the deed which
            was like to be done upon the moorlands.  Everything was now
            in an uproar, some calling for their pistols, some for
            their horses, and some for another flask of wine.  But at
            length some sense came back to their crazed minds, and the
            whole of them, thirteen in number, took horse and started
            in pursuit.  The moon shone clear above them, and they rode
            swiftly abreast, taking that course which the maid must
            needs have taken if she were to reach her own home.

            “They had gone a mile or two when they passed one of the
            night shepherds upon the moorlands, and they cried to him
            to know if he had seen the hunt.  And the man, as the story
            goes, was so crazed with fear that he could scarce speak,
            but at last he said that he had indeed seen the unhappy
            maiden, with the hounds upon her track.  ‘But I have seen
            more than that,’ said he, ‘for Hugo Baskerville passed me
            upon his black mare, and there ran mute behind him such a
            hound of hell as God forbid should ever be at my heels.’
            So the drunken squires cursed the shepherd and rode onward.
             But soon their skins turned cold, for there came a
            galloping across the moor, and the black mare, dabbled with
            white froth, went past with trailing bridle and empty
            saddle.  Then the revellers rode close together, for a
            great fear was on them, but they still followed over the
            moor, though each, had he been alone, would have been right
            glad to have turned his horse’s head.  Riding slowly in
            this fashion they came at last upon the hounds.  These,
            though known for their valour and their breed, were
            whimpering in a cluster at the head of a deep dip or goyal,
            as we call it, upon the moor, some slinking away and some,
            with starting hackles and staring eyes, gazing down the
            narrow valley before them.

            “The company had come to a halt, more sober men, as you may
            guess, than when they started.  The most of them would by
            no means advance, but three of them, the boldest, or it may
            be the most drunken, rode forward down the goyal. Now, it
            opened into a broad space in which stood two of those great
            stones, still to be seen there, which were set by certain
            forgotten peoples in the days of old. The moon was shining
            bright upon the clearing, and there in the centre lay the
            unhappy maid where she had fallen, dead of fear and of
            fatigue.  But it was not the sight of her body, nor yet was
            it that of the body of Hugo Baskerville lying near her,
            which raised the hair upon the heads of these three
            dare-devil roysterers, but it was that, standing over Hugo,
            and plucking at his throat, there stood a foul thing, a
            great, black beast, shaped like a hound, yet larger than
            any hound that ever mortal eye has rested upon.  And even
            as they looked the thing tore the throat out of Hugo
            Baskerville, on which, as it turned its blazing eyes and
            dripping jaws upon them, the three shrieked with fear and
            rode for dear life, still screaming, across the moor.  One,
            it is said, died that very night of what he had seen, and
            the other twain were but broken men for the rest of their
            days.

            “Such is the tale, my sons, of the coming of the hound
            which is said to have plagued the family so sorely ever
            since.  If I have set it down it is because that which is
            clearly known hath less terror than that which is but
            hinted at and guessed.  Nor can it be denied that many of
            the family have been unhappy in their deaths, which have
            been sudden, bloody, and mysterious.  Yet may we shelter
            ourselves in the infinite goodness of Providence, which
            would not forever punish the innocent beyond that third or
            fourth generation which is threatened in Holy Writ.  To
            that Providence, my sons, I hereby commend you, and I
            counsel you by way of caution to forbear from crossing the
            moor in those dark hours when the powers of evil are
            exalted.

            “[This from Hugo Baskerville to his sons Rodger and John,
            with instructions that they say nothing thereof to their
            sister Elizabeth.]”

      When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singular narrative he
      pushed his spectacles up on his forehead and stared across at Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes. The latter yawned and tossed the end of his
      cigarette into the fire.

      “Well?” said he.
