      other, and so an unnecessary risk would be run. I brought
      Cartwright down with me—you remember the little chap at the
      express office—and he has seen after my simple wants: a loaf of
      bread and a clean collar. What does man want more? He has given
      me an extra pair of eyes upon a very active pair of feet, and
      both have been invaluable.”

      “Then my reports have all been wasted!”—My voice trembled as I
      recalled the pains and the pride with which I had composed them.

      Holmes took a bundle of papers from his pocket.

      “Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and very well thumbed, I
      assure you. I made excellent arrangements, and they are only
      delayed one day upon their way. I must compliment you exceedingly
      upon the zeal and the intelligence which you have shown over an
      extraordinarily difficult case.”

      I was still rather raw over the deception which had been
      practised upon me, but the warmth of Holmes’s praise drove my
      anger from my mind. I felt also in my heart that he was right in
      what he said and that it was really best for our purpose that I
      should not have known that he was upon the moor.

      “That’s better,” said he, seeing the shadow rise from my face.
      “And now tell me the result of your visit to Mrs. Laura Lyons—it
      was not difficult for me to guess that it was to see her that you
      had gone, for I am already aware that she is the one person in
      Coombe Tracey who might be of service to us in the matter. In
      fact, if you had not gone today it is exceedingly probable that I
      should have gone tomorrow.”

      The sun had set and dusk was settling over the moor. The air had
      turned chill and we withdrew into the hut for warmth. There,
      sitting together in the twilight, I told Holmes of my
      conversation with the lady. So interested was he that I had to
      repeat some of it twice before he was satisfied.

      “This is most important,” said he when I had concluded. “It fills
      up a gap which I had been unable to bridge in this most complex
      affair. You are aware, perhaps, that a close intimacy exists
      between this lady and the man Stapleton?”

      “I did not know of a close intimacy.”

      “There can be no doubt about the matter. They meet, they write,
      there is a complete understanding between them. Now, this puts a
      very powerful weapon into our hands. If I could only use it to
      detach his wife—”

      “His wife?”

      “I am giving you some information now, in return for all that you
      have given me. The lady who has passed here as Miss Stapleton is
      in reality his wife.”

      “Good heavens, Holmes! Are you sure of what you say? How could he
      have permitted Sir Henry to fall in love with her?”

      “Sir Henry’s falling in love could do no harm to anyone except
      Sir Henry. He took particular care that Sir Henry did not make
      love to her, as you have yourself observed. I repeat that the
      lady is his wife and not his sister.”

      “But why this elaborate deception?”

      “Because he foresaw that she would be very much more useful to
      him in the character of a free woman.”

      All my unspoken instincts, my vague suspicions, suddenly took
      shape and centred upon the naturalist. In that impassive
      colourless man, with his straw hat and his butterfly-net, I
      seemed to see something terrible—a creature of infinite patience
      and craft, with a smiling face and a murderous heart.

      “It is he, then, who is our enemy—it is he who dogged us in
      London?”

      “So I read the riddle.”

      “And the warning—it must have come from her!”

      “Exactly.”

      The shape of some monstrous villainy, half seen, half guessed,
      loomed through the darkness which had girt me so long.

      “But are you sure of this, Holmes? How do you know that the woman
      is his wife?”

      “Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a true piece of
      autobiography upon the occasion when he first met you, and I dare
      say he has many a time regretted it since. He was once a
      schoolmaster in the north of England. Now, there is no one more
      easy to trace than a schoolmaster. There are scholastic agencies
      by which one may identify any man who has been in the profession.
      A little investigation showed me that a school had come to grief
      under atrocious circumstances, and that the man who had owned
      it—the name was different—had disappeared with his wife. The
      descriptions agreed. When I learned that the missing man was
