      devoted to entomology the identification was complete.”

      The darkness was rising, but much was still hidden by the
      shadows.

      “If this woman is in truth his wife, where does Mrs. Laura Lyons
      come in?” I asked.

      “That is one of the points upon which your own researches have
      shed a light. Your interview with the lady has cleared the
      situation very much. I did not know about a projected divorce
      between herself and her husband. In that case, regarding
      Stapleton as an unmarried man, she counted no doubt upon becoming
      his wife.”

      “And when she is undeceived?”

      “Why, then we may find the lady of service. It must be our first
      duty to see her—both of us—tomorrow. Don’t you think, Watson,
      that you are away from your charge rather long? Your place should
      be at Baskerville Hall.”

      The last red streaks had faded away in the west and night had
      settled upon the moor. A few faint stars were gleaming in a
      violet sky.

      “One last question, Holmes,” I said as I rose. “Surely there is
      no need of secrecy between you and me. What is the meaning of it
      all? What is he after?”

      Holmes’s voice sank as he answered:

      “It is murder, Watson—refined, cold-blooded, deliberate murder.
      Do not ask me for particulars. My nets are closing upon him, even
      as his are upon Sir Henry, and with your help he is already
      almost at my mercy. There is but one danger which can threaten
      us. It is that he should strike before we are ready to do so.
      Another day—two at the most—and I have my case complete, but
      until then guard your charge as closely as ever a fond mother
      watched her ailing child. Your mission today has justified
      itself, and yet I could almost wish that you had not left his
      side. Hark!”

      A terrible scream—a prolonged yell of horror and anguish—burst
      out of the silence of the moor. That frightful cry turned the
      blood to ice in my veins.

      “Oh, my God!” I gasped. “What is it? What does it mean?”

      Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark, athletic
      outline at the door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head
      thrust forward, his face peering into the darkness.

      “Hush!” he whispered. “Hush!”

      The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence, but it had
      pealed out from somewhere far off on the shadowy plain. Now it
      burst upon our ears, nearer, louder, more urgent than before.

      “Where is it?” Holmes whispered; and I knew from the thrill of
      his voice that he, the man of iron, was shaken to the soul.
      “Where is it, Watson?”

      “There, I think.” I pointed into the darkness.

      “No, there!”

      Again the agonised cry swept through the silent night, louder and
      much nearer than ever. And a new sound mingled with it, a deep,
      muttered rumble, musical and yet menacing, rising and falling
      like the low, constant murmur of the sea.

      “The hound!” cried Holmes. “Come, Watson, come! Great heavens, if
      we are too late!”

      He had started running swiftly over the moor, and I had followed
      at his heels. But now from somewhere among the broken ground
      immediately in front of us there came one last despairing yell,
      and then a dull, heavy thud. We halted and listened. Not another
      sound broke the heavy silence of the windless night.

      I saw Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man distracted.
      He stamped his feet upon the ground.

      “He has beaten us, Watson. We are too late.”

      “No, no, surely not!”

      “Fool that I was to hold my hand. And you, Watson, see what comes
      of abandoning your charge! But, by Heaven, if the worst has
      happened we’ll avenge him!”

      Blindly we ran through the gloom, blundering against boulders,
      forcing our way through gorse bushes, panting up hills and
      rushing down slopes, heading always in the direction whence those
      dreadful sounds had come. At every rise Holmes looked eagerly
      round him, but the shadows were thick upon the moor, and nothing
      moved upon its dreary face.

      “Can you see anything?”
