      “I have no doubt that anxiety and exposure have driven him off
      his head. He has rushed about the moor in a crazy state and
      eventually fallen over here and broken his neck.”

      “That seems the most reasonable theory,” said Stapleton, and he
      gave a sigh which I took to indicate his relief. “What do you
      think about it, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?”

      My friend bowed his compliments. “You are quick at
      identification,” said he.

      “We have been expecting you in these parts since Dr. Watson came
      down. You are in time to see a tragedy.”

      “Yes, indeed. I have no doubt that my friend’s explanation will
      cover the facts. I will take an unpleasant remembrance back to
      London with me tomorrow.”

      “Oh, you return tomorrow?”

      “That is my intention.”

      “I hope your visit has cast some light upon those occurrences
      which have puzzled us?”

      Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

      “One cannot always have the success for which one hopes. An
      investigator needs facts and not legends or rumours. It has not
      been a satisfactory case.”

      My friend spoke in his frankest and most unconcerned manner.
      Stapleton still looked hard at him. Then he turned to me.

      “I would suggest carrying this poor fellow to my house, but it
      would give my sister such a fright that I do not feel justified
      in doing it. I think that if we put something over his face he
      will be safe until morning.”

      And so it was arranged. Resisting Stapleton’s offer of
      hospitality, Holmes and I set off to Baskerville Hall, leaving
      the naturalist to return alone. Looking back we saw the figure
      moving slowly away over the broad moor, and behind him that one
      black smudge on the silvered slope which showed where the man was
      lying who had come so horribly to his end.

      “We’re at close grips at last,” said Holmes as we walked together
      across the moor. “What a nerve the fellow has! How he pulled
      himself together in the face of what must have been a paralyzing
      shock when he found that the wrong man had fallen a victim to his
      plot. I told you in London, Watson, and I tell you now again,
      that we have never had a foeman more worthy of our steel.”

      “I am sorry that he has seen you.”

      “And so was I at first. But there was no getting out of it.”

      “What effect do you think it will have upon his plans now that he
      knows you are here?”

      “It may cause him to be more cautious, or it may drive him to
      desperate measures at once. Like most clever criminals, he may be
      too confident in his own cleverness and imagine that he has
      completely deceived us.”

      “Why should we not arrest him at once?”

      “My dear Watson, you were born to be a man of action. Your
      instinct is always to do something energetic. But supposing, for
      argument’s sake, that we had him arrested tonight, what on earth
      the better off should we be for that? We could prove nothing
      against him. There’s the devilish cunning of it! If he were
      acting through a human agent we could get some evidence, but if
      we were to drag this great dog to the light of day it would not
      help us in putting a rope round the neck of its master.”

      “Surely we have a case.”

      “Not a shadow of one—only surmise and conjecture. We should be
      laughed out of court if we came with such a story and such
      evidence.”

      “There is Sir Charles’s death.”

      “Found dead without a mark upon him. You and I know that he died
      of sheer fright, and we know also what frightened him, but how
      are we to get twelve stolid jurymen to know it? What signs are
      there of a hound? Where are the marks of its fangs? Of course we
      know that a hound does not bite a dead body and that Sir Charles
      was dead before ever the brute overtook him. But we have to prove
      all this, and we are not in a position to do it.”

      “Well, then, tonight?”

      “We are not much better off tonight. Again, there was no direct
      connection between the hound and the man’s death. We never saw
      the hound. We heard it, but we could not prove that it was
      running upon this man’s trail. There is a complete absence of
      motive. No, my dear fellow; we must reconcile ourselves to the
      fact that we have no case at present, and that it is worth our
