
      “Then I will do it.”

      “And as you value your life do not go across the moor in any
      direction save along the straight path which leads from Merripit
      House to the Grimpen Road, and is your natural way home.”

      “I will do just what you say.”

      “Very good. I should be glad to get away as soon after breakfast
      as possible, so as to reach London in the afternoon.”

      I was much astounded by this programme, though I remembered that
      Holmes had said to Stapleton on the night before that his visit
      would terminate next day. It had not crossed my mind however,
      that he would wish me to go with him, nor could I understand how
      we could both be absent at a moment which he himself declared to
      be critical. There was nothing for it, however, but implicit
      obedience; so we bade good-bye to our rueful friend, and a couple
      of hours afterwards we were at the station of Coombe Tracey and
      had dispatched the trap upon its return journey. A small boy was
      waiting upon the platform.

      “Any orders, sir?”

      “You will take this train to town, Cartwright. The moment you
      arrive you will send a wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, in my name,
      to say that if he finds the pocketbook which I have dropped he is
      to send it by registered post to Baker Street.”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “And ask at the station office if there is a message for me.”

      The boy returned with a telegram, which Holmes handed to me. It
      ran:

      Wire received. Coming down with unsigned warrant. Arrive
      five-forty. Lestrade.

      “That is in answer to mine of this morning. He is the best of the
      professionals, I think, and we may need his assistance. Now,
      Watson, I think that we cannot employ our time better than by
      calling upon your acquaintance, Mrs. Laura Lyons.”

      His plan of campaign was beginning to be evident. He would use
      the baronet in order to convince the Stapletons that we were
      really gone, while we should actually return at the instant when
      we were likely to be needed. That telegram from London, if
      mentioned by Sir Henry to the Stapletons, must remove the last
      suspicions from their minds. Already I seemed to see our nets
      drawing closer around that lean-jawed pike.

      Mrs. Laura Lyons was in her office, and Sherlock Holmes opened
      his interview with a frankness and directness which considerably
      amazed her.

      “I am investigating the circumstances which attended the death of
      the late Sir Charles Baskerville,” said he. “My friend here, Dr.
      Watson, has informed me of what you have communicated, and also
      of what you have withheld in connection with that matter.”

      “What have I withheld?” she asked defiantly.

      “You have confessed that you asked Sir Charles to be at the gate
      at ten o’clock. We know that that was the place and hour of his
      death. You have withheld what the connection is between these
      events.”

      “There is no connection.”

      “In that case the coincidence must indeed be an extraordinary
      one. But I think that we shall succeed in establishing a
      connection, after all. I wish to be perfectly frank with you,
      Mrs. Lyons. We regard this case as one of murder, and the
      evidence may implicate not only your friend Mr. Stapleton but his
      wife as well.”

      The lady sprang from her chair.

      “His wife!” she cried.

      “The fact is no longer a secret. The person who has passed for
      his sister is really his wife.”

      Mrs. Lyons had resumed her seat. Her hands were grasping the arms
      of her chair, and I saw that the pink nails had turned white with
      the pressure of her grip.

      “His wife!” she said again. “His wife! He is not a married man.”

      Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

      “Prove it to me! Prove it to me! And if you can do so—!”

      The fierce flash of her eyes said more than any words.

      “I have come prepared to do so,” said Holmes, drawing several
      papers from his pocket. “Here is a photograph of the couple taken
      in York four years ago. It is indorsed ‘Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,’
