      but you will have no difficulty in recognizing him, and her also,
      if you know her by sight. Here are three written descriptions by
      trustworthy witnesses of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur, who at that time
      kept St. Oliver’s private school. Read them and see if you can
      doubt the identity of these people.”

      She glanced at them, and then looked up at us with the set, rigid
      face of a desperate woman.

      “Mr. Holmes,” she said, “this man had offered me marriage on
      condition that I could get a divorce from my husband. He has lied
      to me, the villain, in every conceivable way. Not one word of
      truth has he ever told me. And why—why? I imagined that all was
      for my own sake. But now I see that I was never anything but a
      tool in his hands. Why should I preserve faith with him who never
      kept any with me? Why should I try to shield him from the
      consequences of his own wicked acts? Ask me what you like, and
      there is nothing which I shall hold back. One thing I swear to
      you, and that is that when I wrote the letter I never dreamed of
      any harm to the old gentleman, who had been my kindest friend.”

      “I entirely believe you, madam,” said Sherlock Holmes. “The
      recital of these events must be very painful to you, and perhaps
      it will make it easier if I tell you what occurred, and you can
      check me if I make any material mistake. The sending of this
      letter was suggested to you by Stapleton?”

      “He dictated it.”

      “I presume that the reason he gave was that you would receive
      help from Sir Charles for the legal expenses connected with your
      divorce?”

      “Exactly.”

      “And then after you had sent the letter he dissuaded you from
      keeping the appointment?”

      “He told me that it would hurt his self-respect that any other
      man should find the money for such an object, and that though he
      was a poor man himself he would devote his last penny to removing
      the obstacles which divided us.”

      “He appears to be a very consistent character. And then you heard
      nothing until you read the reports of the death in the paper?”

      “No.”

      “And he made you swear to say nothing about your appointment with
      Sir Charles?”

      “He did. He said that the death was a very mysterious one, and
      that I should certainly be suspected if the facts came out. He
      frightened me into remaining silent.”

      “Quite so. But you had your suspicions?”

      She hesitated and looked down.

      “I knew him,” she said. “But if he had kept faith with me I
      should always have done so with him.”

      “I think that on the whole you have had a fortunate escape,” said
      Sherlock Holmes. “You have had him in your power and he knew it,
      and yet you are alive. You have been walking for some months very
      near to the edge of a precipice. We must wish you good-morning
      now, Mrs. Lyons, and it is probable that you will very shortly
      hear from us again.”

      “Our case becomes rounded off, and difficulty after difficulty
      thins away in front of us,” said Holmes as we stood waiting for
      the arrival of the express from town. “I shall soon be in the
      position of being able to put into a single connected narrative
      one of the most singular and sensational crimes of modern times.
      Students of criminology will remember the analogous incidents in
      Godno, in Little Russia, in the year ’66, and of course there are
      the Anderson murders in North Carolina, but this case possesses
      some features which are entirely its own. Even now we have no
      clear case against this very wily man. But I shall be very much
      surprised if it is not clear enough before we go to bed this
      night.”

      The London express came roaring into the station, and a small,
      wiry bulldog of a man had sprung from a first-class carriage. We
      all three shook hands, and I saw at once from the reverential way
      in which Lestrade gazed at my companion that he had learned a
      good deal since the days when they had first worked together. I
      could well remember the scorn which the theories of the reasoner
      used then to excite in the practical man.

      “Anything good?” he asked.

      “The biggest thing for years,” said Holmes. “We have two hours
      before we need think of starting. I think we might employ it in
      getting some dinner and then, Lestrade, we will take the London
      fog out of your throat by giving you a breath of the pure night
      air of Dartmoor. Never been there? Ah, well, I don’t suppose you
      will forget your first visit.”


