      flickering flame. Never in the delirious dream of a disordered
      brain could anything more savage, more appalling, more hellish be
      conceived than that dark form and savage face which broke upon us
      out of the wall of fog.

      With long bounds the huge black creature was leaping down the
      track, following hard upon the footsteps of our friend. So
      paralyzed were we by the apparition that we allowed him to pass
      before we had recovered our nerve. Then Holmes and I both fired
      together, and the creature gave a hideous howl, which showed that
      one at least had hit him. He did not pause, however, but bounded
      onward. Far away on the path we saw Sir Henry looking back, his
      face white in the moonlight, his hands raised in horror, glaring
      helplessly at the frightful thing which was hunting him down. But
      that cry of pain from the hound had blown all our fears to the
      winds. If he was vulnerable he was mortal, and if we could wound
      him we could kill him. Never have I seen a man run as Holmes ran
      that night. I am reckoned fleet of foot, but he outpaced me as
      much as I outpaced the little professional. In front of us as we
      flew up the track we heard scream after scream from Sir Henry and
      the deep roar of the hound. I was in time to see the beast spring
      upon its victim, hurl him to the ground, and worry at his throat.
      But the next instant Holmes had emptied five barrels of his
      revolver into the creature’s flank. With a last howl of agony and
      a vicious snap in the air, it rolled upon its back, four feet
      pawing furiously, and then fell limp upon its side. I stooped,
      panting, and pressed my pistol to the dreadful, shimmering head,
      but it was useless to press the trigger. The giant hound was
      dead.

      Sir Henry lay insensible where he had fallen. We tore away his
      collar, and Holmes breathed a prayer of gratitude when we saw
      that there was no sign of a wound and that the rescue had been in
      time. Already our friend’s eyelids shivered and he made a feeble
      effort to move. Lestrade thrust his brandy-flask between the
      baronet’s teeth, and two frightened eyes were looking up at us.

      “My God!” he whispered. “What was it? What, in heaven’s name, was
      it?”

      “It’s dead, whatever it is,” said Holmes. “We’ve laid the family
      ghost once and forever.”

      In mere size and strength it was a terrible creature which was
      lying stretched before us. It was not a pure bloodhound and it
      was not a pure mastiff; but it appeared to be a combination of
      the two—gaunt, savage, and as large as a small lioness. Even now
      in the stillness of death, the huge jaws seemed to be dripping
      with a bluish flame and the small, deep-set, cruel eyes were
      ringed with fire. I placed my hand upon the glowing muzzle, and
      as I held them up my own fingers smouldered and gleamed in the
      darkness.

      “Phosphorus,” I said.

      “A cunning preparation of it,” said Holmes, sniffing at the dead
      animal. “There is no smell which might have interfered with his
      power of scent. We owe you a deep apology, Sir Henry, for having
      exposed you to this fright. I was prepared for a hound, but not
      for such a creature as this. And the fog gave us little time to
      receive him.”

      “You have saved my life.”

      “Having first endangered it. Are you strong enough to stand?”

      “Give me another mouthful of that brandy and I shall be ready for
      anything. So! Now, if you will help me up. What do you propose to
      do?”

      “To leave you here. You are not fit for further adventures
      tonight. If you will wait, one or other of us will go back with
      you to the Hall.”

      He tried to stagger to his feet; but he was still ghastly pale
      and trembling in every limb. We helped him to a rock, where he
      sat shivering with his face buried in his hands.

      “We must leave you now,” said Holmes. “The rest of our work must
      be done, and every moment is of importance. We have our case, and
      now we only want our man.

      “It’s a thousand to one against our finding him at the house,” he
      continued as we retraced our steps swiftly down the path. “Those
      shots must have told him that the game was up.”

      “We were some distance off, and this fog may have deadened them.”

      “He followed the hound to call him off—of that you may be
      certain. No, no, he’s gone by this time! But we’ll search the
      house and make sure.”

      The front door was open, so we rushed in and hurried from room to
      room to the amazement of a doddering old manservant, who met us
      in the passage. There was no light save in the dining-room, but
      Holmes caught up the lamp and left no corner of the house
      unexplored. No sign could we see of the man whom we were chasing.
      On the upper floor, however, one of the bedroom doors was locked.

      “There’s someone in here,” cried Lestrade. “I can hear a
